in
modern medicine in Modern science, there's a tendency to identify
consciousness mind and Brain
Make mind a function of the brain
Consciousness a function of the mind and to treat them
chemically and
to alter them
chemically and that well-being is good chemistry of the brain higher consciousness is good chemistry of the brain and
Unhappiness is bad chemistry of the brain nobody is responsible, but we need to change the chemistry to make it better
now
In the yogic thought brain mind and consciousness are three different things
but they're related at a certain level so my questions is sadhguru Ji is the nature of
Brain mind and
Consciousness, how we can use the brain and mind in the proper way without getting stuck in them and the model of healing?
That is based on more consciousness than brain chemistry
In the yogic sciences that is no such thing as brain brain is just body
Like that is a heart like the liver that is a brain. It's just body I
Think this overly exaggerated sense of what is brain
Is coming because as I mentioned it a morning out here?
Our education systems have become purely intellectual
We think intellect is everything that?
Mean I mean I will try to say it in a very brief way
When you say something very complex in a brief way
There will be holes in it, please pick the holes if you find them otherwise okay?
In the yogic system. We are looking at the human mind at sixteen parts
The sixteen parts are in four categories the first one is buddhi. Buddhi means the intellect
Intellect, I am asking you do you want your intellect Sharp or blunt?
You all of you must choose. I'm going to bless you
You want it sharp, so intellect is essentially like a knife
You use a knife to cut things open
This is the nature of the intellect whatever you give it it will dissect
then time modern science is coming out of human intellect, so
Everything is by dissection if you give this flower to the scientist
They will rip it open and see
If you rip it open and see yes of course there are many facts
You will know about the flower only thing is you won't have the flower after that?
and
Now if you really want to know something let's say you really want to get to know your mother please don't dissector
that's not the way it works because
the what you can know by dissection
Is Material aspect of life?
You cannot know life by dissection
only the material and the physical can be dissected
But now we are using our intellect to understand the entire gamut of things
Now we try to dissect
we go on talking about unifying the world and
Unity and enlightenment everything with intellect this is like using a knife to stitch something
If you stitch something with a knife you leave it in tatters
So you are seeing this the more knowledge you gather about something the more?
Misunderstanding and further away from truth. We are becoming not because information is bad because we are trying to stitch with a knife
So intellect is like a knife it must be sharp
it is a survival instrument if you did not have a
Discriminatory intellect you would not be surviving on this planet very very vital
But survival is all that it can do but intellect cannot function
Unless there is a certain volume of memory if you wipe out all your memory
It doesn't matter how whatever you Iq is right now if you take off all your memory you will suddenly look stupid you
May be still intelligent
But you look stupid this how this happens in India people are putting rural children and urban children together and testing them
just because of the volume of information that the urban child has he looks smart a
Rural child looks stupid, but you can put them in real situations
You will see they will come out so smart because their intelligence is fully on
so
Intellect looks smart only when you back it up with lot of information and hence you see information technology
And everybody is mad about information. They are not looking into their phones simply for waste of time
Because only with all that bits and pieces of data
They look smart among their friends in the society in which they live it's only with Data they can look smart without data
They can't do one thing smart. I will just tell you an example
We have two different types of schools one is a modern kind of school where 30% of the children coming from the United States
in India and
Another is a completely traditional school where we teach them only yoga
classical dance classical music color if I to the mother of all martial arts Sanskrit language and English language
They don't go through any academics as such
This is a Few years ago little little ones. They all run to the place to hand wash
Hand washes at this height many of the six seven year olds can't reach
So all this those who are going through modern education. They will go and stand there in a very civilized way wait
for a teacher or somebody to come and put a bench they will climb on the bench and then wash
These other kids ran there the older ones went down the end. Oh and climb on top of them wash and run away
so too much orientation towards intellect and other dimensions of
Intelligence are completely uncultivated today, so the next dimension of the mind is reffered to as ahankara
Which we have completely ignored ahankara does not mean ego as most people are beginning to think it means
Identity what are you identified with?
Because intellect is essentially an instrument to protect the identity that you have taken off if I say
I'm Indian suddenly. It is my intellect makes me think that way makes me willing to live and die for it
you will see just a piece of cloth if you show I
mean a flag
People will have tears in their eyes
Just the identity if you had put them somewhere else and shown another flag the same thing would happen in India Pakistan
It's very very striking because it was one nation and suddenly somebody draw a line and the entire emotion the way it works is
Amazing simply because you got identified with this or that, so intellect is an instrument which protects the identity identity
is that
Instrument which allows the intellect to function in a certain way when I say a certain way
Suppose you're identified just with this "me" as a person
Your intellect will do only this to protecting you all the time
All the time just doing this now
I say my identity is my family
Now your intellect will do everything to protect that or you say a community or race or a religion or a nation?
in the name of Race Religion nation how many things we have done which are utterly idiotic and inhuman but
we do it with great pride because we are identified because this is the nature if we have to continue this analogy if
Intellect is the knife
The hand that holds it is identity
You tell me in handling a knife
Knife is important that it must be sharp
But whether it becomes destructive or productive is determined by the hand that holds it isn't it?
But in today's society in today's world. There is no cultivation of the hand at all
The smaller and smaller identities that we are creating will inevitably cause
Disturbance within the human being and in the world there is no other way right from ancient times
in Eastern cultures
Always we have been taught to I have a cosmic identity. I am brahmasmi
At the age of 12 you must know I am burma's me. This means. I am the cosmos
without identifying with a limitless
Identity no education should be given only after identity is fixed then education
Because without the right kind of identity education becomes destructive
Because you have a limited identity we can say whatever we want
But essentially all crime all a will almost terrible things that we do is just a question of limited identity isn't it?
this is
This is my way that is your way this is my country this your country this my religion is your religion this all it is
So without cultivating the identity we are sharpening the knife we have an unsteady hand
But we are sharpening the knife and arming it with memory. So the next dimension of the mind is called Manus
Which is a silo of memory?
here there are eight dimensions of memory this starts from
Elemental Memory atomic Memory evolutionary Memory
Karmic Memory and
Conscious memory unconscious memory
Articulate memory inarticulate memory like this there are many states of memory as we already looked at this
This body carries the memory of everything that's happened on this planet if you pay enough attention
We can know simply by looking at this how evolution has happened only 150 years ago
Charles Darwin talked about evolution by studying life on the planet
But over 15,000 years ago adI yogi spoke about how life evolved he said first
almost every Indian person is
Knows it but not conscious of it is
the 10 avatars
You must be studying much of it
The first one is fish or water life next one is amphibious
Next one is a mammal next one is half-man half-animal next one is a dwarf man
Next one is a full grown man
But volatile next one is a peaceful man next one is a loving man
Next one is a meditative man next one is supposed to be the mystical man
This is not one man. Story. This is the evolution of life on this planet, so fifteen thousand years ago
Somebody spoke about this by not looking into the microscope
But looking inward because the entire evolutionary story is written here
so the yogic system is focused on this as to how to
Activate different dimensions of memory because without that with limited amount of memory you are bound to act in immature ways
so if your intellect become super capable
Then it's very very important your identity is cosmic
Limitless Identity and
Your memory is evolved that all dimensions of Memory are active
These three function in a certain way some people have evolved it in certain ways
But largely it is happening in a very skewed way too much of intellect and other things are very minimalistic
The fourth Dimension of intelligence is referred to as chitta
This is a dimension of intelligence which is unsullied by memory
See we must understand this we are who we are only because of the memory that we carry
from the color of our skin
To what we identify with what we are whether we are male or female or everything everything is a question of memory
It is the memory stored in this which is deciding all these aspects whether I?
am a human being or some other creature is also question of
Memory is a tremendous possibility, but memory is also a limitation and a boundary
What is you and what is me is right now
The boundary of this is just memory what I remember in my system
And what you remember in your system is
The Boundary so memory is also a boundary memory is the basis of all forms that have happened
There is a certain memory which creates patterns which patterns in turn create physical forms the way
We are the kind of form that we have taken is essentially out of the basic memory that is there never it got
Confused in the sense suppose you and a cow every day start eating mangoes
never it happens that one day by accident or by
Lapse of memory the cow became human or you became a cow
Both of you is the same food every day
But it will not happen because the memory is so strongly instinct at various levels
We are recognizing eight different dimensions of memory
But chitta has no memory no memory means no boundary and intelligence Beyond bounds
in the yogic culture
There is a mischievous way of expressing this we say if you touch your Chitta God will become your slave
Because your intelligence becomes boundless everything becomes within access
So it is very important because this is the first time we must understand
this this is the first time where our survival process is as
Organized as it is today
This is the first time that human beings have so much time to look at things otherwise
Just putting the food together would take 24 hours
Once again in affluent societies. We are going back to the same thing as you said in Montana
Somebody has to work three jobs when so much land is there why do you need to do a job?
To make your food no, because you want to buy it in a Walmart
I'm saying we just kind of twisted the entire thing
For the first time our survival for example today you you go into your superstore
What you need for next one year you can buy bring it home and not step out of your house for the next one year
It's possible never before it was possible to do morning's water if you have to get means you have to walk down to the river
or the pond or something for the first time our
Survival process is so enormous LI organized. This is the time for humanity
This is the time for humanity to explore deeper dimensions of life
you
What is your opinion of teaching in native language versus teaching in english?
See, we must understand this?
These twenty, five or thirty different languages in this country
If you, add up all the dialects they, tell, me there are thirteen hundred dialects but
At least twenty-five to thirty, full-fledged languages with a script of their own
With a, huge body of literature behind it a
Full-fledged language is not our overnight happening
The oldest language in the planet is tamil language you're in tamil nadu
The language is a very important part of human intelligence
many, linguists around the world have clearly recognized the power of language
Human, ability to use language
Essentially is rooted in india it's from here the ability to use the language came to the rest of the world
Almost all the languages, which are largely you you know
Europe and arab arrived in europe and arabia based
All of them have, some stiff influence on them
so
in our
Eagerness to just get a job, we don't have to completely destroy this languages, we will lose out something very very big
The english is a fantastic thing
In terms of its simplicity
in terms of
Because internet and you know modern technology, has taken to english language it is a must
Nobody can be against english anymore you got to take it even if you
Don't like the british you have to like the english language
It is part of our language now
one good thing, we did
though, many, bad things happened during the british rule one good thing is
we absorb the language
Today many educated indians can, speak better english than most british can speak
It's a good, thing but at the same time, we should, never kill. These languages, which have been there for thousands of years?
Because the phonetic range that, is there in indian languages is such it stimulates every aspect of who you are
English language has a very narrow. Phonetic range
so this ability to use
Sounds to stimulate and trigger one's intelligence and energy within ourselves
Is something that, we should not give up every
Child must know one more language other than english whatever that is because anyway our states are divided on?
Linguistic basis so in that state whatever the languages they must know
in our over-enthusiasm
For employment oriented education i know, many schools are completely destroying the local languages this should not happen
Local language must, be there it must be a part of you at least people should know
How to speak, and read if not you are not a great you don't know
How to write great literature at least you must know
How to read and speak one more language other than english language our education policy, has taken that into consideration
it is the responsibility of every school to ensure that happens and
I feel the easier way to do it is maybe they're
Studying science they're an english medium they're largely studying english language but
You could, make, some play, some theatre some art something in local languages, so that people use that as a
Social thing use that as an entertainment
Where there is a natural interest in how to express themselves in that language
It is a must, we should, not kill. These languages because it's taken thousands of years to create it
This is our national pride that, we have the maximum number of languages if we had to create this many languages see
We must understand this for example let's say tamil nadu and karnataka tamil nadu and andhra pradesh tamil nadu and kerala
There are no
geographical separation
There is no there are, no oceans between these states
There are no mountain ranges clearly demarcating and separating the populations for a long time but though they, lived here for thousands of years
They kept their, language, these, people get their language
It's so beautiful
When they, went to trade and transact. They learn the other language but
they, always kept the language
But today the new, generations are losing their language so rapidly it's very important all of you at least in your homes with
your children and
Wherever possible there must be a certain amount of time where, we must use the local language
It's very important, we will regret this deeply after a couple of generations if we don't take care of it now
Because you can't bring back a language you can kill it but you can't breathe life into it it's very difficult
you
[Sadhguru] So, technology... because the technology is subjective
now, the technologies that you are handling are objective technologies.
Now, I'm talking about a subjective technology; it's about you.
Here, you are the software that you're trying to handle.
Fundamentally, if you look at yourself, right now you are operating
according to the software that you have become. Please see.
What kind of family you were born in, what kind of parents, what kind of school,
what kind of friends, what kind of atmosphere, what kind of religion,
what kind of society, that's the kind of person you are right now, isn't it?
So, software was written into you, haphazardly, by anybody
and everybody that you came in touch with, not by trained professionals.
Just about anybody who came, they put in something.
Wherever you went, somebody stuffed something into your head.
You had no choice from where to receive, where not to receive. If you say,
'I don't like this man. I don't want to receive anything from him', you will receive
much more from him than anybody else, that's how this one is.
So, right now the very way you think, feel, understand and act in your life
is just the way your software is, isn't it? Yes? The very way you move your body
is the way your software is, I want you to understand this - it is so deeply conditioned.
If you......somebody you know very well, somebody whom you're very familiar with
is walking one mile away, you can't recognize anything about that person
but just the way he moves, you know it is this person, isn't it?
Because the very way his body moves only moves whichever way his software is written
but this software was written unconsciously.
Now, if we want some freedom to happen, if we want some transformation to happen,
we have to create a little space between you and your software.
You're too identified with it, you're just lost in it, that's all you become.
Now you have to create a little distance.
You've heard of a word called Buddha? Hmm?
If I say Buddha, probably you always think of Gautama the Buddha.
Gautama is not the only Buddha. That's not his name. He became a Buddha.
There have been thousands of Buddhas and there still are.
What Buddha means is..., Bu means buddhi or the intellect;
Dha means Dhadha, one who is above. One who is above his intellect is a Buddha.
Once you're above the intellectual process, suffering is finished in your life
because all suffering is manufactured there in your logical mind.
When you're into your intellect, when you're stuck in your intellect
you're a nonstop suffering human being.
Wherever you're put, you have a way of creating some kind of suffering --
your fears, your anxieties, your tensions, your stress.
Just see, people are capable of suffering just about anything. Yes? Isn't it so?
People are capable of suffering just about anything in the world, please see.
If you're not educated, you will suffer that. If you get educated, you suffer that.
If you don't find a job, you'll suffer that. If you find a job, you suffer that.
If you're not married, you'll suffer that. If you get married, you suffer that.
If you don't have children, you suffer that. If you have children, you suffer that, isn't it?
People are capable of suffering just about anything --
this is the nature of the intellect. Once you're into the intellect, this is how life is.
If you're below the intellect, you won't suffer so much.
Animals don't suffer as much as you suffer. Physical things, if they're taken care of, they're quite okay.
They don't have the kind of suffering that human beings know, isn't it?
So, if you're below the intellect you don't suffer so much, like you asked that question.
If you're above the intellect, you're a Buddha.
If you're below the intellect, maybe we can call you Buddhu.
If you're in the intellect - nonstop suffering.
So, to avoid suffering, people are inventing many ways to go below the intellect.
Excessive eating alcohol,... you know, excessive indulgence in physical pleasures --
these are all the ways you're trying to avoid the torment of the intellect for some time.
You get drunk and you feel good for a few hours
but then life will catch up with you with more intensity, it won't let you go.
Now, this being, which was below the intellect, somehow evolved into the intellect.
The only way out for this is to evolve beyond the intellect.
So, the fundamentals of yoga, the technology is how to go beyond this.
'So, how to do it now?'
Subjective technologies cannot be explored in uncommitted atmospheres.
You need a very committed, focused atmosphere, otherwise it'll not be in your grasp.
It's not a teaching, it's a method. To implement a method, you need to be in a
certain way, in a certain level of commitment, in a certain level of receptivity,
otherwise it doesn't work, because......see, now if you go into a chemistry laboratory,
you take this chemical, this chemical, if you put it into it something happens.
But if you're not willing to put it into it, if you sit here and think and think and think,
what will this do, what will that do, you will come to all kinds of wrong conclusions.
Till you put it there, you won't know. Maybe it'll explode in your face
but till you put it there, you will not know what it is about.
But now, you are the chemical, you are the chemist and you are the experimental process.
Everything is you! Now, you need a different kind of laboratory; otherwise it doesn't work.
If it was objective we could have just written a book and given it to you but because it's subjective,
you have to be taken step by step because it's a completely different
dimension of perception and experience altogether. 'But is it possible for me?'
It is possible for every human being.
Internally, all of us are equally capable, we are not capable in different ways.
All of us are capable of joy, isn't it? Yes?
If you have been joyful for one moment, that means you're capable of joy, isn't it?
It is just that you're unable to stay there, that's the whole thing.
There is no human being on the planet who has never been joyful.
Every human being has been joyful at some point that means he's capable of joy.
It is just that he's unable to stay there,
so he needs a technology as to how to maintain the atmosphere within himself. It's possible.
Tracey: And so the title of this conversation
the subtitle of conversation with the mystic
Sadhguru: That’s only for you.
I am not conversing with a mystic,
so I am at ease. (Laughter)
Tracey: That's my job got it.
I know and I have many questions you know.
Sadhguru said, ‘I have never seen someone with so many questions.’
He said, ‘No answers, only questions.’
I think that the
the subtext which I actually am talking about because I liked it,
is an experiential… for today, an experiential symposium
on optimal health and well-being.
And I think there is a tremendous amount for us to talk about even in that phrase.
One is the role of experience and
and I will say that, you know,
my office being responsible for cultural transformation,
I’ve become obsessed with what is culture
and the definition that I use because it guides our strategies. is behavior.
This definition was given to me by Erma Rosenberger
is behavior either collective or individual behavior based in experience
and in sentence;
meaning that if we are going to transform
or shift what medical… the medical model is today
and what healthcare is today,
we can’t start with just the data,
if people do not have an inner experience,
not much will change.
Do you… can you say some about what do you think the role of experience is
in today and… and in healthcare
Sadhguru: See, you need to understand this
largely for most human beings,
experience is being kind of created and regulated
by the way they think and feel.
But what you think and what you feel need not
necessarily have anything to do with reality as such.
There is something called as a psychological reality and
there is an existential reality.
By controlling or handling the psychological reality well,
a lot of people can become healthy,
a lot;
because for lot of them, that is the cause of their ailment.
And it can also fix other things to some extent.
So psychol…. like right now,
Mitch was talking about, you know,
somebody prays and somebody creates a certain attitude around them of
love and care and compassion,
this is all psychological structure.
You create a psychological structure with which you become open to certain dimensions of life.
You… It becomes a possibility to transact in a certain way
with least amount of friction
and creates well-being.
But there is an existential dimension to this.
Existentially what are you made of
what are… what is the world made of, if you look at it,
this is the most fundamental aspect of yoga.
This is called as Bhuta Shuddhi.
This means elemental… cleansing of the elemental nature.
The whole universe is a manifestation of five elements.
So is this body.
Out of these five,
there are only four that you can really handle;
another one you just experience,
it’s the ambience for the other four.
So, the earth, water, fire, air, and the space.
So you only have to handle really four.
With four ingredients, so much magic and mischief is happening in the universe.
If there were four million,
we would be not able to handle it.
Four, for sure we can handle, isn’t it?
Four ingredients if they’re functioning the way you want them,
then everything about you will be great.
Out of these four,
72% of your water
I mean …your body is actually water, so is the planet.
The same composition of the planet you have in your body;
about 12% is earth;
about 6% is air;
4% is fire;
the remaining is space
this is how it is looked at.
If you master these four,
even if you have a bit of control over these four,
you will see miraculously you will generate health within the system.
If you fail on this,
then the next level of handling this is
nature has evolved certain things in the form of herbs and very things
many things which are healthful to us.
So we can learn to use them.
If you fail in that,
then you can create a psychological structure which will create health for you.
If you fail in that, then you go for the chemical treatment.
If you fail in that, then you go for a surgery. (Laughs)
Direct intervention of cutting something, putting something,
if nothing else you are capable of doing.
But now you are talking about a large scale thing across the populations.
We always think anything subtle cannot be done large scale.
I disagree with that, this is my opinion;
because it is just that we have not done enough work towards that
and we assume that it’s not possible.
To create a certain sensitivity towards something and
approach it in a subtle manner is possible,
but it’s only possible
if it goes into every home, every parent, every man and woman in the world or in the country
starts working towards it.
When you want such a big goal to be achieved, it’s not going to happen overnight.
We must be willing to be committed for a whole generation or two,
then something will happen;
something wonderful will happen.
But right now,
we are in today’s world, everything has to happen by today evening;
if it doesn’t happen, tomorrow we dump it and have a new project going.
So in that context, it will not happen.
In that context, it’s bet… better we work towards
a plastic heart and a plastic liver and a plastic kidney where we can start replacing them every five years
and somehow function.
See, health does not mean that just the medical parameters are okay.
Health means you must feel a certain sense of wholeness.
The word health itself comes from that word ‘whole.’
A certain sense of wholeness
when you wake up in the morning, you are more alive than you are when you went to bed,
you feel ten years younger than the time when you went to bed.
If you feel like that, that means you are healthy.
It is just that all the tests are showing you are normal,
that is still not normal
because you have no experience of health.
So when you say experience,
ultimately we have come here only to experience life, isn’t it?
So we know that experience is the most important aspect of life.
Now we are talking about the word experience in two different ways.
One is our experience of life itself,
how profound and how wonderful it is or how nasty and how unpleasant it is.
So the pleasantness that we generate in the body,
we call this as health.
Right now, that is the object of discussion.
I don’t want to go further but the same pleasantness if it hits a higher pitch,
we call it pleasure.
But if your mind becomes pleasant, you would call it peacefulness.
If it becomes very pleasant, you would call it joyfulness.
If your emotions become pleasant, you would call it love or affection.
If it becomes very pleasant, you would call it compassion.
If your very life energy if you make it pleasant, we call it bliss.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call it ecstasy.
This is what a human being is seeking all the time.
He wants pleasantness inside.
Well, if your surroundings become pleasant, we call it success.
This is what every human being is looking for all the time.
There is a whole science as to how to create the inner pleasantness.
External pleasantness needs cooperation from many people.
It’s not just yours.
There are other stakeholders who may want to make it nasty for you. (Laughs)
It needs many people’s cooperation
but inner pleasantness is one hundred percent yours.
But why have you not strived for it?
We have not strived for it because
generally we have spread this message,
‘It is not possible unless everything in the universe is fixed.’
When I first came to United States,
one word I was hearing everywhere is, ‘stress management.’ (Few Laugh)
I could not understand this because in my mind,
we manage things which are precious to us
our family, our wealth, our business and whatever else which is valuable to us.
Why would anybody want to manage stress,
is something I couldn’t get for some time. (Laughs)
It is just because we have spread the idea
that stress is a part of your life. Stress is not a part of your life,
stress is not because of your job,
stress is simply because you do not know how to manage your own system.
Juhi Chawla: Today, many women
in our modern society are stepping out and having a career
and I just like to know, what do you think of this
of women stepping out, being career people,
managing home as well,
being financially independent,
is this good?
Sadhguru: See every woman should do what she wants to do as an individual person.
It should not be made into a trend in a society
or the only right thing to do in the world
because I think if… if a woman is
intends to have two children and raise them,
I think it’s a full time job.
I’m not saying she should not go out and work.
If she wishes to, as an individual person, she’s free to do what she wants to do.
But having two children is not about reproduction.
You’re manufacturing the next generation of people.
How the world will be tomorrow,
will be determined by what kind of mothers you have today,
believe me.
So, why is it you know, I’ve seen many ladies coming to me
and say,
when I ask “What’re you doing?
“Oh I’m just a housewife.”
I said, “Why do you say, you’re just a housewife?”
You… you don’t u… seem to understand the significance of, you know,
being able to nurture two or three new lives.
It’s not… it’s not a ‘not important’ job.
It’s a very important job. I’ve to say this,
you know my… my mother never said anything much.
She never went about telling me, “I love you” or “You love me” or anything of this kind.
It’s just that she simply lived and we… it never occurred to us,
whether she loves us, she doesn’t love us,
such questions never came because her whole life was dedicated to us, you know.
Juhi Chawla: Hmm.
Sadhguru: We know she lived for us.
She never said it once, but that’s all it is.
And I cannot imagine that part of my life, without her being around.
It is just that she never played an active role in what I am
but the background that she set, without the ambience that she set for me¸
I would never be what I am, for sure.
Whatever else may be within me,
still the soil that she set around me,
without ever interfering with who I am,
what I am, just the ambience she set around me
and the effort she took to set that ambience,
she gave her life to set that ambience,
knowing fully well it will play out somewhere.
And why does anybody think this is not an important job?
In my life, I feel what she did is the most important thing she did to me.
And one of the most important things that have happened to me is
early life you never had to think about anything.
It was simply she made sure the background was simply always there,
without a single thought about it,
unconcerned about what’s happening around you
is what gave me the possibility of sitting with my eyes closed for days on end
Otherwise, this wouldn’t be possible, I’m saying (Laughs).
So, career - I want you to understand
Right now because we have made the whole world into economics
unfortunately women also getting as stupid as men.
As if how much money you earn is going to determine the value of your life.
No,
it is just procurement of things that you need,
money is just about that.
Man was procuring,
woman was taking about the more beautiful aspects of life.
Now woman also wants to procure.
If there is such an economic need in the family,
fine she must do it.
But it is not a compulsive need,
it must not be set up as something better to do than doing something.
If she sings so
if she… if she plays music or if she just loves her children
or if she cooks beautifully or she just lives beautifully like a flower,
it’s good enough, I’m saying.
It is not necessary that only if she earns this much money,
she’s… her… she’s doing something valuable,
otherwise she’s not.
If there’s an economic need, she can do it.
Or if she has a passion for doing it, she can do it.
But, let not such values be set up in the world
because you’re not evolving, you’re regressing,
you’re making survival more important than aesthetics of life
(Sadhguru): Nothing beautiful ever is going to come
unless we actively make it happen.
Fanciful dates are not going to do it;
position of the stars is not going to do it;
above all, if you want to raise human consciousness,
you don’t need any galactic help.
If you are willing, it's possible;
if you are not willing,
it doesn’t matter all the damn stars align,
it's not going to happen.
So world over people are making efforts.
I hope
I hope
that they are not idiotic people who believe
the date is going to raise their consciousness;
they’re smart people who want to make use of the date
to get everybody to meditate.
If it is so. I am with them.
2012, twenty-first December,
as many people as possible on this planet
if you meditate, human consciousness will raise
but the reality is on any damn day if all of us meditate,
it will raise. (Laughter)
So anyway they have come up with a doomsday date;
let's at least meditate and do something.
‘Oh everybody is going to meditate, let me see’
no, let's do it.
And it is this date or any date if all of us do it,
it’ll anyway work
but we need a date, what to do?
So we got one so close up; let's not miss it
and you’ve never seen uch an event. Tch,
you shouldn’t miss it.
The moment we are born as human beings,
somehow our lives got complicated. (Laughs)
If we had come here
as any other creature on this planet,
life would be very simple –
eating
eating, sleeping, reproducing and dying one day.
Now we have to do all those things,
but after doing all those things we find
somehow it's not enough.
Isn't it so?
Yes?
Once you come as a human being
somehow all these are compulsory in many ways
people have to do these things
but these processes of survival
even after they are complete
somehow a human being is still not complete.
He wants to be soething more than what he is right now.
This longing is endlessly going on.
Finding expressions in so many different ways
but all the time human being is
in pursuit of something more than
what he is right now.
Somehow where you are right now
wherever you may be is not enough.
You want to be little more than what you are right now.
Isn't it?
Isn't it so? ?
If you know only money, maybe
you are thinking of little more money.
If you know only pleasure,
maybe little more pressure.
Power, little more power.
Whatever it maybe,
whatever your currency maybe,
but everybody is wanting to be little more
than what they are right now.
The process of desiring is continuously going on.
So this longing of well-being,
because ultimately everything that you’re doing is
in search of your well-being -
whether you are going to work
or you are going to the bar
or you’re going to the temple
or … you are getting married
or you are having children,
you are studying in university -
everything is fundamentally your well-being.
Isn’t it so?
Yes?
Different people may have different ideas about well-being.
Somebody thinks if they can eat twice a day,
that's well-being.
For somebody else, that's not well-being, isn’t it?
Our ideas of well-being maybe different
but every human being,
consciously or unconsciously,
constantly in search of his well-being, isn’t it?
Questioner: Recently we were blessed with Devi’s grace
in our home in the form of a yantra
and my question is
is she the geometrical representation of the deity in Coimbatore
and what is the difference between her,
the one that you just consecrated in Salem,
the utsav murti
and the yantra and the gudi?
Sadhguru: Do you see some difference between me and the speaker,
which is out there which is speaking to you right now?
You notice some difference?
But it’s right now it’s an extension, isn’t it?
Whatever I speak wouldn’t reach you
unless the microphone and the speaker are functioning.
So the yantra and the gudi is just like that
delivery systems.
In some way even now as I speak,
when we say this voice,
this voice has a certain pattern,
every pattern is a geometric form in some way.
Now if I speak
Now as I’m speaking waves and patterns are falling out of my mouth,
yes?
This used to happen to me when you know as a little child
I go sit in the class like this (Gestures),
I see things spilling out of their mouth
but, you know I don’t translate it in my head back into sound,
I just see the patterns.
So even now these patterns are spilling out of my mouth,
this microphone is picking it up
making it into a completely demet… different geometric pattern
and going down to that speaker
and there again it is being transformed into another geometric pattern
which again is coming as sound.
See, right now
from this microphone which is a wireless microphone,
to this to the amp… to the amplifier
and from the amplifier to the speaker they are different geometries,
yes?
They’re different types of wave patterns
it is not sound,
it is sound but it is not the kind of sound that your ears can perceive,
otherwise what is going here from the transmitter that I have
to the amplifier it’s a different geometry.
Because it’s a … different geometry,
only that receiver there is able to perceive that,
not you.
For you to perceive,
again it has to be transformed into a geometric pattern that you hear,
which is… as you… as you experience sound right now.
Similarly the Devi is of a …certain geometric pattern.
The transmission is of a different geometric pattern,
how you receive it, the means or the
the instrument through which you receive it,
is of a different geometric pattern
but what is delivered is the same thing.
Myself,
this microphone,
this transmitter,
that receiver,
that amplifier,
these speakers
very different, isn’t it?
Though these are all different things,
still what is delivered is just what I speak.
Suppose somewhere along the way either this transmitter
or that receiver,
that amplifier
gets little mischievous
and starts delivering a different geometric pattern
than what I am delivering through my speech,
then it will start doing its own pravachan
or whatever you want to call it
I never thought I’m doing a pravachan but just now
it will start talking something different,
then this is a dangerous process, isn’t it?
This whole microphone this, this, this is a terrible process
because I say one thing, it says something else
very dangerous.
This is useful only because it only says what I say
amplified, that’s all,
enhanced but not different.
So right now if you are sufficiently enhanced
see this (Referring to oneself) is also a yantra, isn’t it?
The word yantra means a machine.
Isn’t this human mechanism a yantra?
This is the most sophisticated yantra.
You can’t build a better one than this,
you can enhance this by building other yantras.
Because I can speak,
a microphone and this whole system is enhancing my speech,
it’s a wonderful yantra,
this is a machine which is enhancing.
So similarly various activities that we perform
speech,
activity,
mobility
all these things we have enhanced with s… different instruments or machines
that we have created.
In fact all machines that we have created is only enhancement of things that we can already do.
You never created a machine to do something that you yourself cannot do.
You can pick up a handful of earth -
now you created an earth mover which picks up ten tones of earth.
You can speak, so there’s a microphone,
there’s a telephone,
there’s all kinds of phones.
Because you can see there is a telescope,
there is a microscope,
there are all kinds of scopes.
But if you could not see what use is a
what use is a telescope,
what use is a microscope,
both are useless, isn’t it?
Only what we can do, to enhance that is what we have created instruments or machines.
So Devi - it’s a certain kind of machine.
Tch, all the Devi devotees won’t like this.
Say “Sadhguru don’t say this.”
Devi, tch (Laughs).
I think I have been telling this to people,
people have been protesting.
Whenever I use the word “tool” to refer to Dhyanalinga or to Devi
they say, “Sadhguru please…”,
it’s like I’m… I’m treading on something that’s sacred to them.
They don’t understand I put my life to make these things happen (Laughter).
They think sitting like this (Gestures) is more involvement
than throwing your life to make something happen (Laughs).
So for such people you must come to the ashram.
I will give you a plumber’s job,
I won’t try electrician’s
because it’ll kind of ini… immediately end, you know.
If you try electrician’s job without tools,
instantly (Gestures),
you won’t have an experience I’m saying (Laughter).
A plumber’s job is good,
plumbing job - no tools,
no spanners,
no winches,
no chain winches nothing.
With your hands, nails and teeth you do the plumbing job in the ashram for three days.
In three days your fingers will be torn,
nails will be gone,
most of the teeth will be gone,
may be jaw would have worn out
and your mouth would be (Gestures) like this
because this whole thing would be worn out trying to open the pipes.
So after three days if I give you a spanner (Gestures?)
will you worship this spanner or no? (Laughter/Applause)
For sure you will worship the spanner or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So this is how a spanner-god happens.
Yes,
spanner-gods
because in this country we worship a spanner,
we worship a crowbar,
we worship a car,
we worship electrical switches everything (Laughter).
No, it’s not a joke,
we are appreciating that these yantras are what
which are
given us dominance on this planet.
You cannot even run as fast as a dog,
yes?
You can’t even fly like a crow.
Forget a crow even you can’t fly like a mosquito (Laughter).
Tell me,
compared to every other creature on this planet
you’re really no good by yourself
but we are capable of creating tools.
Because we created various types of tools
we have dominance on the planet.
Suddenly we are seen as the top of the pile of evolution.
I want you to look at a human being without any tool in this world.
No animal would think you are the peak of evolution (Laughter).
Yes or no (Laughs)?
Yes?
No animal,
no creature would even consider
looking up at you.
Only because you are capable of creating tools from a simple club
with which you could fight something
to many, many, many, more things that we have created which we call as technology today,
only because of this.
So Devi is a certain machine, tch.
But anything that is capable of doing something that you yourself cannot do,
you naturally bow down to it, isn’t it?
Can you run as fast as your car?
I’m asking you, unless you are a lousy driver.
So people sit down and bow down to the car.
Maybe today they’re bowing down with fear
that if you do this (Gestures) it will run well.
It will not run well, unless you drive well, okay (Laughs)?
You bow down to the car,
acknowledging you’re capable of doing something more than me.
Why are you standing in front of me like this?
Simply because in some dimension you’ve noticed I’m able to do something more than you,
yes?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So just another tool,
a Guru is another tool,
please make use of it,
don’t just worship it.
If you have a screwdriver
if you just… one day in a year you worship it on Ayudha Pooja it’s good (Laughter/Applause),
everyday if you only worship it, not make use of it, what is the point?
A tool should be bowed down too,
because it is capable of doing something that your own
you yourself cannot do.
Body itself is a tool.
Either you keep it as an enhanced tool or a miserable tool.
Mind itself is a tool that you have.
You can keep it as a tremendous tool or a miserable tool
but it is a tool.
So Devi is another kind of machine or a tool.
How to make use of her,
there are procedures.
How to use your computer there is a procedure,
there’s a… there is a user’s manual.
Similarly how to make use of this machine called Devi,
we have a user’s manual.
This is how you approach her.
If do this, this and this, this machine you will have handle over it,
so that you can use it and enhance yourself
because you … Right now my voice is enhanced
because I’m using the machine called microphone.
And this microphone is essentially designed for me
I go to every conferences,
men and women are using this microphone
it’s sticking out like this like they got some extra teeth.
I’m the only one… (Gestures?) (Laughter/Applause)
(Sadhguru): You okay for a joke?
Hum?
Any kind?
In his previous life Shankaran Pillai was a very good man.
After a brief illness he died.
Being a good man,
naturally he went to heaven.
When he went to heaven the angels,
the reception committee, welcomed him
and then they opened his account book.
You know, there they keep account of everything, you know that?
They turned pages
good deed, good deed, good deed, good deed, good deed
cover to cover only good deeds.
Then there was a little confusion among the angels.
Then they came to Shankaran Pillai and said,
‘Mr. Pillai there is a little problem.’
Shankaran Pillai said, ‘What is the problem?’
They said, ‘See we have various types of accommodation in heaven.
One bad deed, highest level of heaven, sea front view.
Two bad deeds next level;
three bad deeds next level
like this there are many levels of heaven
but no bad deed,
there is no such accommodation here.
Till now we have never received a man like you
without a single bad deed.
So, we don't know what to do with you.’
Shankaran Pillai said,
‘What nonsense?
I was such a good man in the world,
nobody wanted to come anywhere near me.
I just lived with the hope of going to heaven.
Even here a problem?
What kind of nonsense is this?
Always I was told being a good man I can go to heaven.
When I do a good job of it you have problem.’
Then the angles met among themselves,
had a discussion and then said
‘Don’t you worry Mr. Pillai we have found a solution.
We are giving you three hours extra life.
Your body is still intact anyway.
You go back,
just commit one bad deed.
We will put you in the highest heaven;
nothing lost.’
And lo! he became alive here.
He sat up once again.
He sat here thinking how to commit a bad deed.
See, he has no practice,
not like you, you know;
he's never committed one.
So, he sat there thinking, thinking, thinking
one and a half hours passed away.
Then he suddenly realized
there is a woman well passed her prime in the neighborhood
who has been casting inviting glances at him.
He being a good man he never looked that way.
Now he thought, ‘Okay adultery is a bad deed,’
so he went.
He went to that lady’s house and knocked on the door.
She came and opened the door.
Shankaran Pillai said ‘I want you.’
‘Why Mr. Pillai, they told me just yesterday evening
that you are on your death bed.
What is this?
He said ‘It doesn’t matter, I want you.’
He went in.
Whatever he lacked in practice
he made it up with his enthusiasm to go to heaven.
Nature took over, things happened.
Now, he looked at his time,
the watch is ticking away.
He doesn’t want to die in her house.
He wants to go back home and die.
So, he is leaving in a hurry...
he said, ‘I need to go. I need to go’ and he came to the door.
The lady also came to see him off.
As he was leaving the woman said,
‘Mr. Pillai do you know what a good deed you have done for me today?’
One more good deed,
If you are too good you will neither make it here nor there
because your goodness is always coming
in comparing yourself with somebody or something, isn't it?
How do you certify yourself ‘I am a good man’
you look at this one,
‘He is not okay, she is not okay, she is not okay, he is not okay.
Compared to all those people I am a good man,’ isn't it?
If you want to be really good
you have to make everybody in the world not okay,
please see.
Those people who think they are very good in their minds,
nobody is okay. Isn't it so?
Have you noticed this?
If nobody is okay in the world
it is not a question of goodness,
it just means you are sick in your head;
that’s what it means.
Yes or no?
If nobody in the world is okay what does it mean?
You know one of the things that your psychiatric or psychologist
will tell you is
if you start thinking everybody is not okay that means
you’re heading for insanity?
Yes?
Because it is madness and
your goodness is just a kind of madness.
Maybe it's needed to keep some balance in the society sometimes
but not for your evolution.
Your morality will not evolve you.
If you begin to recognize life as life
then you will see as life you respond to life
and you don’t need morals,
you know how to be.
You will never cross any lines
because there are no lines
but at the same time you are simply incapable of
doing anything harmful, that's all.
You are not holding back,
you are not controlling
because somebody told you,
‘This is the way you must be.
You should not do that,
you should not do this,’
the very way you are there is no question of harm;
it doesn’t exist in you.
Effortlessly you can be good.
Right now, with great difficulty you are being good, isn't it?
And if you’re too good
even in heaven they will reject you.
Questioner: In Gangotri I saw that you were performing the arathi to the Ganga at Badrinath or Kedarnath.
Sadhguru: No, no, that is in Rishikesh.
Questioner: Rishikesh.
Now what is the significance of doing this at the Ganga?
(Sadhguru): Arathi to Ganga, that’s not my idea.
I am not given to rituals at all.
It is just that when we come back from the tour and land in,
you know it's a different experience.
You drive through Himalayas for two - three weeks
and come down to Rishikesh.
There huge group of people waiting
and they want to arrange something for us.
So they arranged one special arathi to be done.
It's our culture;
I am no struggle with the culture;
I am very much a part of it
but personally I am not given to any rituals at all,
absolutely no.
I told you in my whole life I have never even prayed once.
Not once I have uttered a prayer in any sense.
So arathi for Ganga is just water;
water is one of the elements out of which you are made.
One basic aspect of yoga,
the most fundamental aspect of yoga is known as Bhuta Shuddhi.
That means working towards creating
a certain freedom from the five elements,
becoming free from the five elements
because five elements
it is the mischief of the five elements which is creation.
There are few people, Ammu and somebody else constantly asking
“Why creation, why creation?”
I didn’t do it.
It’s the mischief of these five elements constantly playing tricks with you,
in so many ways.
What you call as body,
what you call as planet,
what you call as everything is just the mischief of five elements.
So there is a whole,
the fundamental fabric of yoga is called Bhuta Shuddhi
that means to become free from five elements.
There is a whole lot of sadhana with every aspect
with earth, wind, fire, water, space - like this there are sadhanas.
Those of you who come from Tamil Nadu would be aware of this to some extent
and one is in Andhra Pradesh.
So you should also be aware.
Five major temples were built for five elements in South India.
Are you aware of this?
For earth, for wind, for fire, space and water.
I think the wind is in Andhra Pradesh, is it?
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: Shreeshailam is.
Participant: Kalahasthi.
Sadhguru: Kalahasthi, that’s for wind.
So for five elements they built these temples,
these are not worshipping temples.
These are temples which were built for sadhana.
These are yogic temples.
So these temples are built in a certain way,
with a certain type of energy which assists that type of sadhana.
So yogis travel through these five temples
doing sadhana in many cycles to become free from this.
We are thinking of
I am thinking of doing a program like that,
that where we take a group of people
and spend certain time in these five different temples,
doing variety of sadhana for that particular element.
You are in the water temple
you do sadhana for the water element within you.
You are in the fire temple - you do sadhana for the fire element within you.
To get mastery over and also to enhance these aspects
which could do miracles for one’s health and well-being in so many ways.
It is not for health or well-being;
fundamentally it’s go… to go beyond the limitations of the physical.
So water is an element.
Now, see when we sit for food,
when we sit in front of food,
in this country we don’t thank any god.
We just bow down to the food itself
Right now if you don’t eat for five days
if God appears what will you ask?
Food,
because this moment your existence is food.
One who sustains you is your God, isn't it?
Food is sustaining you,
water is sustaining you,
air that you breathe is sustaining you.
Five days if you don’t eat food will become God.
Two days if you don’t drink water, water will become God.
Two minutes if you don’t breathe, air will become God.
Yes or no?
So we bow down to all the five elements so that they function well for us.
We not only bow down
we also learn mechanisms to make them function well
so that your fire, your water, your earth and your wind everything functions well.
Only if these five elements are in cohesive function
you have a proper body and a proper life, isn't it?
Isn’t it so?
So there is a whole process called Bhuta Shuddhi
but that process what you probably saw on this video is more like when we come down,
these people want to honor me,
they do some extra, you know special pooja something.
There is a beautiful
incident that occurred around Ashtavakra
when Janek Maharaj the Emperor became enlightened
And [everything] and emperor becoming enlightened
It's not only a rare thing it is a fantastic thing
because an enlightened ruler means
many things to the people
that is no better blessing, so when it happened
Ashtavakra his guru as gurus are known to be always difficult
When you just think you found your way they tell you that's not it
When [Janaka] thought he is enlightened, and this is it
Ashtavakra said, that's not it. You have to go back and rule the kingdom because
You may not want it. That's not the point
The point is people deserve an enlightened King
so
Jenaka whenever he found time. He made his trips
to ashtavakra
hermitage in
the Little Deep into the jungle
so
Janaka making regular trips to the hermitage
Obviously because gurus are lonely people
because where to find the enlighten company
very difficult
So obviously both of them enjoying the certain repo
Both of them enjoying each of this company all the other disciples saw this
that
Ashtavakra the great being has
seems to have a certain weakness
For the emperor whenever he comes they are chatting away laughing together this this this
These people who have left everything or they think they have left everything and come and they are here as Sannyasis
Not paying enough attention to them
But if you leave them ten minutes with him, they won't know what to do next
So their little bit of resentment building up
Ashtavakra is conscious of that you let it build up, every build up is a possibility
Something should build up, then only you can do something if nothing builds up that means there are dead people around
not live people
Live people are there something must build up?
Joy, must build up love must build of ecstasy must build up or at least resentment or hatred or Jealousy something must build up
Something is building up means we can do something with them nothing what to do with him?
so he let it build up and then
this incident occurred
Janaka also came, and he was sitting
in the Satsangh at the back
and
As the Ashtavakra was speaking something
Suddenly a Soldier burst into
the Satsang and
Without even looking at the guru he ran to the emperor with a loud voice. He said
The palace is on fire
You need to come right now
Janaka said get out of here
how dare
You run into the Satsang without bowing down to my guru you run here and shout some nonsense. Just get out of here
And Ashtavakra continue with whatever had to happen
[Janaka] just sat there
palace burning
Nobody is concerned here there of course there screaming, but here nobody is concerned
Then this continued. It's a lap of the master event three days. You know
Till you feel your legs have had enough it continues
then
Was going on and one of the boys
Who was helping around in Ashram?
Ran into the Satsangh and
said a bunch of monkeys are playing havoc
with
these brahmachari's clothes
the moment this boy said this
many of them got up and Ran
To save the clothing what is their clothing not designer stuff? It is designer of course but
just a piece of lion cloth a piece of cloth.
They ran to save those cloths
and
Then they chased away the monkeys and recovered whatever they could and they came back
So Ashtavakra continued
and then he said
Here is an emperor. His palace full of wealth and people
not only
Physical world there are people there are lives
People who are dear to him
palace is burning, but he's concerned about breaking the rhythm of the Satsang
you
Who claim that you've given up everything in your life?
for a piece of cloth
Without even thinking you run out without even looking at me
To save a piece of cloth
No, but we have only two, one we are wearing one Is there the monkeys take it away? What do we do?
so we are in a
More needy situation than the emperor. Maybe emperor can bin another build another palace, but we
Well, you could learn something from Adam
there lots of Adams underwear in the trees
So Ashtavakra said the question is not about what you possess. It's about. How you possess
Even if you have a kingdom in your hands, you can hold it in a certain way
Kingdom is not necessarily outside in terms of wealth and people and money
For most people their kingdom is their own body and their mind how you hold it?
If you hold it one way
It will make you bleed with pain if you hold it another way
You will be spot on with life because it doesn't take effort to be life.
I'm just Reminding you you are life. Hello
yes you are
just see the rock which is standing next to you. How simple and easy it is
Yes, or no if you are not live how simple and easy it is this is why?
people
want to drown themselves in
Alcohol and drug an excessive food and something else and something else or the toilet cleaning
Because in some way you have discovered not being life is so simple and easy
If you're not very alive, it's so simple and easy yes, it some bad luck like a rock
but
When the moment of death comes you know your life pretending to be something else otherwise, you couldn't die
That will become a point of inflection
so
We want you to be conscious. This is the reason why I'm constantly reminding you you will die one day
You will die one day. I am not wishing that for you
It's just that without my help it will happen. I'm confident about that
Don't have to wish you that you anyway will die
To constant reminder of death is just this to make you know you're alive
you can't go about like this rock you can't go about like a
Mechanical creature who can walk and talk and do everything that you can do, but cannot be alive, that's important thing
Is an important thing no no no?
If I can do what somebody can do that's all that matters
It doesn't matter whether alive or not isn't it if I can do things as good as somebody else
If I can be as successful as somebody else if I can possess, what somebody else has or nobody else has?
That's good enough
For most human beings, that's good enough
so in many ways
Unconsciously they have understood the solution for life is not to be alive
That that's not a solution. That's a deception because no matter what you do
even if you die that proves your life
When you're alive if you don't prove that you are life when you die at least you prove that you were life
Yes, or no
So you cannot escape this?
Neither with tricks of life nor with death you cannot escape this so is it a trap
It is not a trap
It is a tremendous possibility the soil that you walk upon is aspiring to become life
If there was no aspiration, it wouldn't stand up as a tree
There is that which is not life is aspiring to become life
Otherwise nothing would happen in the universe
Everything is aspiring to become life and become the peak of life
You can call this evolutionary process you can call this whatever you want
But essentially everything that is not life is aspiring to become life
Everything that is life is aspiring to become a higher life. This is not a teaching. This is not a scripture
This is not somebody's ideology. This is the way life is always
This aspiration is there the only way you can quieten it is
By pretending to be not life or by getting enlightened both these things will do the same
same result but  worlds apart
you
Tracey: I want to explore the way we educate physicians in this country
there is a lot of research around this in the United States,
medical education that we take caring compassionate people into our medical schools.
So it is not look as though the problem is our selection.
People are calm with open hearts and with compassion and love
and there is a lot of data that looks at what happens one year into medical training,
two years into medical training
what the studies show is that one year, tow years into training
empathy and compassion in the people that that were empathetic, loving people and they came in has to
has plummeted
Sadhguru: See, we are still
see if you want flowers to grow in your garden,
you don’t have to think flowers,
you don’t have to chant flowers.
You just have to think of soil, manure, water, sunlight
nothing to do with flowers;
if you handle filth well, flowers will happen.
Tracey: That’s good. If you handle filth well, flowers will happen… Write that down
Sadhguru: Those people who think of flowers,
they will end up with Chinese-made plastic flowers.
Tracey: Yes.
Sadhguru: They will not have flowers.
So we are again thinking of empathy, compassion, love
these are all consequences of a human being, being in a certain way.
We are trying… see the… the whole approach of the intellect is
go for the fruit, goal-oriented.
No, not the fruit, the root
you nurture the root, fruit will happen.
Fruit is a consequence.
You are shooting for the consequence without being interested in the cause.
That’s not going to produce long-term results.
Then this is what you will end up with
something that will work short-term and then that itself becomes a huge problem.
Right now, healthcare system itself is a huge problem
The very fact that pharmaceutical industry is the second largest industry on the planet
speaks volumes about our health, isn’t it?
Tracey: Yes.
Sadhguru: People tell me,
I do not know the statistic.
These are all things which are, you know, being circulated on the internet and things like that.
They say almost thirty seven percent of the medicine,
all kinds of medicines manufactured in the world are consumed by Americans themselves.
Tracy: Uh-huh
Sadhguru: They don’t even account for a miniscule of the population
and if they’re consuming thirty seven percent,
either they are paranoid about their health
or really they are unhealthy.
One of these things must be true, isn’t it?
So we need to look at this.
If you want this to enter the medical school,
one simple way is
if the medical school can start in some way,
we can… we can prescribe a method with which first,
one who wants to touch somebody else’s body
should make some effort to know about his own.
(Questioner): How do you define inner beauty?
(Sadhguru): Inner beauty?
(Questioner): Yes.
(Sadhguru): If you have the right kind of eyes, everything is absolutely beautiful.
(Questioner): There’s no relative thing.
(Sadhguru): Relative thing is a social factor again, it’s a training,
it’s depends on what kind of data has gone into your mind.
But if you are in a certain state of joy and you look at anything
everything is beautiful.
When you’re unhappy, only certain things are beautiful,
certain things are ugly.
When you’re very happy,
you look at anything,
everything looks absolutely beautiful.
See, there are many ways to look at this.
One simple way is;
right now you may be identified with many things,
starting from your physical body, to your mind, to your education,
to your religion, to your society,
to various things that you hold in your life
but when you simply sit here,
if you simply sit with me right now,
you’re just a piece of life, isn’t it?
A certain amount of life energy, that’s all you are,
isn’t it so?
Identified with many, many things,
but fundamentally
you’re just a certain amount of life energy.
So this life energy which I,
which you call as ‘myself’ at this moment,
this life energy sometimes has been very joyful, has it been?
Has it been?
Please say yes,
otherwise it’s tragedy.
Sometimes it’s been utterly miserable,
sometimes very peaceful,
sometimes turmoil,
sometimes agony,
sometimes ecstasy.
This has happened to this, isn’t it?
So this life energy which you call as ‘myself’ is
capable of all these things.
So if this life energy is capable of all these things,
if you were given a choice
what kind of expression your life energy should find right now in this moment,
what would you choose?
Agony or ecstasy?
Definitely ecstasy.
So if there was a conscious choice about
how to keep your life energies right now,
definitely you would have kept yourself absolutely joyful and ecstatic.
Only because a large part of you
is happening unconsciously,
other things which you do not want are happening
within you.
What you do not want is happening in the world,
you cannot stop it 100 percent;
only to some extent we manage these things.
But within you,
you are the only ingredient.
In the world there are a million things.
See, if we want to create a situation,
the way we want it,
we need the cooperation of 100 people around us.
All of them will never cooperate 100 percent,
they will all play the game that way,
isn’t it?
In any given situation.
Even if you’re just two people in the family,
you cannot have the situation 100 percent the way you want it,
yes or no?
This is the reality with the outside,
but with the inside you’re the only reality.
Nobody in the world happens your way,
at least this one person must happen your way, isn’t it?
But right now, even this person is not happening your way,
that’s why you’re asking what is the way to joy.
Your mind is not happening the way you want it,
your body is not happening the way you want it,
your emotion is not happening the way you want it,
nor your life energies are happening the way you want it.
We need to do something about it, isn’t it?
If all these four are happening the way you want them,
you would definitely be joyful every moment of your life, isn’t it?
Irrespective of what’s happening around you.
So we need to explore the technology,
because it’s a subjective technology,
because the ingredient is you,
it’s about you.
Unless we create a certain atmosphere of commitment and focus,
to look beyond certain things that you’re identified with right now,
it will not be possible to explore this.
The reason why the spiritual sciences,
especially in this country
which was so rich in the mystical traditions,
has become so ridiculous is,
people tried to do it anywhere and everywhere,
without necessary committed atmospheres.
Sadhguru: So I want you to know no thought is spiritual.
Thought is just a thought,
but it’s a tremendous instrument,
it can do things.
A thought does not take you anywhere,
but a thought can set the course of your life.
Suppose I sit here and think of Vishakhapatnam,
how much ever in detail I imagine Vishakhapatnam,
still I don’t get there, isn’t it?
It may fire up a desire within me to go to Vishakhapatnam,
but I’ll not get there thinking about it.
So thought doesn’t take you anywhere,
but it sets the direction.
Whatever you think of,
naturally you tend to go in that direction,
so keep having spiritual thoughts.
One day
If I keep on thinking about Vishakhapatnam,
one day I’ll buy the ticket to go there, isn’t it?
So keep thinking,
one day you will want to go there,
desire will come, isn’t it?
What you’re thinking of is what you desire. Isn’t it so?
Keep having spiritual thoughts,
but be clear what is a spiritual thought,
because I don’t know what it is
because I’ve never had a spiritual thought till now.
So do not classify your thoughts as spiritual and non-spiritual.
Just look at this -
don’t even think about spirituality
do you want to be a full-fledged life
or do you want to be a half-baked life?
That’s all.
(Questioner): They say ignorance is bliss.
Do you believe in it and why?
(Sadhguru): Ignorance is bliss till life bites your head off.
Till then it is bliss.
Do one thing,
you climb the tallest building in Bombay,
just be ignorant of the gravitational forces,
just jump.
You will see it will be so blissful
till you hit the ground.
Till then it’s really blissful, actually.
Have you ever done any sky diving?
You must do.
You go 20,000 feet up in the air and just jump off,
it’s just fantastic
but it is just that the earth is rushing at you.
If that one little ball is not there it’s just fantastic, you know?
So ignorance is bliss till you get smashed.
In that small period it’s wonderful.
What’s there to believe or disbelieve in it?
If you’re ignorant and you try to do things,
will life get you or no?
Hum?
Will life get you or no?
Then why are you asking me such questions?
Don’t you have enough experience to know
if you’re ignorant about something
and enter that sphere of life it’s going to get you?
Yes or no?
Yes.
First of all,
stop trying to live by slogans.
Why are you trying to live by slogans?
You must live out of your awareness and intelligence,
not out of a slogan, isn’t it?
If you go by slogans,
slogans are for crowds who have no intelligence,
just to make them believe something and do a specific act
but not for life.
You cannot handle life with a slogan, isn’t it?
It is just like
you don’t want to apply yourself to your life.
You want to just pass life without involvement.
Why are you seeking a slogan or a formula or a advice or
a philosophy in your life?
Simply because you are unwilling to apply yourself to every little thing in your life.
Please tell me, shall I do it this way or that way?
There is no this way or that way.
You have to look at every situation carefully,
every moment of your life carefully
if you want to live well, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
Do you know electricity will kill you?
Hum?
Hum?
If you’re ignorant of it,
if you stick your finger into that one,
will it make you blissful?
Yes?
Hum?
Then why do ask such a question?
Obviously not, you know.
Everybody knows
but they can’t give up their slogans
because somewhere
there is a hope that I can live here without applying myself.
No
Without involvement there is no life.
Without involvement there cannot be life
and it’s good.
People who do not know involvement will not know life
because if you think this life is not worth involving into,
you should not be alive actually, isn’t it so?
Yes?
Such a phenomenal life,
if you were seeing how to avoid involvement
actually you should not be alive.
It’s a disgrace to your Creator
that you’re unwilling to involve yourself.
(Sadhguru): So certain types of philosophies,
belief systems,
ideologies
all types are attempting the same things,
some are efficient.
The moment you identify yourself
with an ideology
or a belief system
or any entity for that matter;
if you identify,
immediately slowly your brain is turning into a concrete block.
Calcification is happening,
that’s why we call you a bonehead; (Laughs)
it is happening.
How efficiently it happens
depends on the efficiency of the preacher or
the teacher or whoever who works on you.
If he is very efficient,
you will be a solid block
where nothing goes in,
nothing goes out.
You are hurtling yourself through the world –
it doesn’t matter what’s happening to everybody else around you.
If they have not worked upon you very efficiently,
you will be little confused wondering
“is this okay, not okay?”
They’re not wondering unfortunately
they’re dead clear.
A group of terrorists
hijacked the airplanes and did whatever they did
now every one of us have to
pull down everything including our pants,
every time we want to get into an airplane.
Yes,
can’t help it.
So why have people become like this?
Because they are identified with things that they are not.
They have gotten identified with some religious belief
or an ideology
or national identity or whatever.
For all this, what’s the solution?
Solution is only evolution.
How to hurry it up?
We have to put them through a spiritual process.
A spiritual process means
must be understood
something beyond physicality must be brought into their lives.
Why is it so important
to bring something beyond physicality
into one’s life
because physical means boundary;
beyond physical means no boundary.
So you need to understand
somebody wants to shoot you;
somebody wants to bomb you;
somebody wants to pull your hair;
somebody wants to do something
all this is just breaching of boundaries, isn't it?
Yes?
Essentially breaching of boundaries.
Wanting to breach somebody’s boundary
or you feeling that somebody is breaching your boundary
is both only because our identification with the physical is too strong.
We’re not conducting the physical as a tool.
We are conducting it as ourselves.
So if; as a society
if we do not handle these things
the way they need to be handled
with total dispassion,
not angry with them,
not hating them,
simply doing what’s needed –
if we don’t do that,
then violence,
a mild violence will spread across evenly for everybody –
nobody can be at peace.
It’ll happen to the whole humanity.
Now it’s happening only to those who want to fly
but it’s not far away
if you want to drive a car –
suppose, “boom, boom, boom,” five cars explode tomorow
every car will be stopped and checked.
So it is not about
whether this is excessive, this is less
every society has to constantly strive
to keep it down
to whatever extent possible.
Above all,
we must be… on another level,
constantly striving to create human beings
whose presence brings peace..
We need to create people
who will generate a certain level of friction-free existence within yourself.
If there is no friction within yourself,
the chances of you getting into friction with somebody is minimized –
it's not gone.
do not have a fairytale-ish mind thinking it’s all gone,
everything is fantastic!
No,
it’s not gone;
it’s minimized.
Keeping it at the minimum is the best we can do till a day comes,
a possibility comes where one day
we can enlighten the whole world.
I am not a pessimist
but I am not stupid enough to think
it’s going to happen in my lifetime –
no.
I am just thinking even if a few hundred people blossom,
fantastic
because they will multiply it further.
Our prospects are very good,
we’ve done a good job
very good actually
Shekhar Kapur: So, Sadhguru, it’s… that’s very powerful inside.
I just walked inside into
into the space where all the brahmacharies are chanting.
There’s something special about their chants.
It’s kind of… it kind of hits you right here (Gestures).
It’s kind of energizing and power.
So, what is it?
What’s a brahmacharie?
I mean, we understand in Hinduism, brahmacharie means denial,
and you often said it’s not about denial,
it’s about gaining something without denying anything.
So, tell me about it. (Sadhguru Laughs)
And I have to say, they’re both men and women in there.
There… it’s not like,
they’re not like monks,
here all the women would be put up in a nunnery,
and the monks are in some monastery.
It’s… they’re all there.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) for example, somebody is climbing,
out to climb Mount Everest, okay?
He prepares for years,
probably for a lifetime he prepares.
And then he is in the harshest of climate,
denying himself every pleasure of life,
of comfort,
of family,
of society,
everything that normally people want to have,
he denies himself all that to climb the mountain.
But do you really believe he is denying himself?
Or is he making another possibility,
which you can never imagine, real in his life?
So, that’s brahmacharya.
The word brahmacharya literally means
Brahman means the ultimate.
Charya means the path.
You’re on the path of the ultimate.
Or in other words, you are somebody who is not willing to settle for small things.
So, anybody who has created anything worthwhile in their lives
have naturally denied themselves lot of simple pleasures other people are having.
When you’re making a film,
maybe you’re not eating well,
maybe you’re not sleeping well.
Are you taking your afternoon nap
sitting with your wife,
enjoying the siesta,
having dinner with them, with the family,
are you doing all this?
Everything you deny yourself because you want to create something, isn't it?
Isn't that true with every man or woman
who has created something worthwhile in their life?
The same with brahmacharya.
They are on the path of the ultimate
because of that, their attention is not diverted to other things that people think are valuable.
Shekhar Kapur: So, what’s the ultimate?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) See here, if you look around,
there’s brick and stone,
or rather mud and stone and trees and plants
this is Creation.
But now if you look at this,
from the same soil this tree is coming,
throwing out –
right now there’re no flowers,
but it throws out wonderful, fragrant flowers.
From the same soil, a mango tree will come and throw out mangoes.
From the same soil, you have come and making movies (Laughs).
From the same soil, I have come, and I’m a guru.
So, there is something here which can make this mud into a tree,
into a fruit,
into a filmmaker,
into a guru
and into a billion other things.
Don’t you want to know what it is?
Don’t you want to experience what it is?
And if it was somewhere in heaven, I’m not interested.
But, if you eat a banana,
that banana becomes a human being within you.
There is something here (Referring to oneself)
which can transform a rice grain or a banana or a piece of bread into a human being.
This is the ultimate source of Creation.
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Don’t you want to know what it is?
Don’t you want to experience?
Don’t you want to know the power of it, the beauty of it, the joy of it?
So, these are people who have had a taste of that, and now they want all of it.
They don’t care whether they eat or not.
They don’t care whether they drink, smoke and enjoy
other simple physical pleasures that other people are addicted to.
They have had a taste of the ultimate,
now they want it all.
They won’t settle for anything less.
Shekhar Kapur: Okay.
Now, I understand that till you experienced it,
it’s… it’s an experiential… sensation, or more than as a sensation.
Talk about the ultimate.
What is the ultimate?
Sadhguru: See, my… my work as a guru is just to give you a taste of that ultimate,
so that your life goes into a tizzy,
and you go crazy,
and you want to go for it.
You have had a taste, now you can’t stop. (Laughs)
Shekhar Kapur: So your work is to drive people mad?
Sadhguru: Yes.
Shekhar Kapur: Right, okay.
Sadhguru: Because… because if people sleep through their life,
in the name of comfort,
in the name of security, they’re wasting their life.
They must go all the way.
This is not my desire –
it’s their desire also,
because today you have a desire to fulfill this.
If that happens, you want the next one and the next one and the next one.
If you carefully look at your desiring process itself,
you will see you’re not willing to settle for anything limited, isn't it?
There is something within you which doesn’t like boundaries.
There is something within you which is longing for the ultimate always.
So this is not my idea,
this is not my philosophy that you should seek ultimate.
You’re anyway seeking ultimate in unconscious ways.
I’m saying if you seek in unconscious ways,
you will always remain frustrated
and the chances of finding it are remote.
It’s better to seek what you want in a conscious way,
in a focused way.
So, brahmacharies are those people,
they are also seeking just what you’re seeking
but they are seeking it one hundred percent consciously.
Shekhar Kapur: So, what is the ultimate? (Sadhguru Laughs)
Are there other words?
I mean, I’m looking for words.
Sadhguru: What is ultimate?
See, whatever we look at,
we can only look at the way you understand it right now, okay?
If I say something which is not in your understanding,
now I’ll be compelling you to believe me or disbelieve me.
I don’t want to go into such obscenities.
I think it’s obscene to demand that you must believe me.
So, right now, in your life,
do you see that you… when you stand here,
what you call as ‘myself’ actually you gathered over a period of time?
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Hmm? In terms of your mind
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: …it’s a huge heap of impressions.
In terms of your body, it is a heap of food that you have eaten.
So, you gathered this.
What you gather can be yours
can it ever be you?
Shekhar Kapur: No.
Then what is the ‘you’ beyond yours?
What’s the
Sadhguru: So, you’re existing here without even knowing ‘what is me.’
So, this ‘me’, right now, we will go this way.
this ‘me’ is the ultimate.
This ‘me’ is not a simple me.
This ‘me’ can make a, you know, a piece of bread into a human being, a banana (Laughs) into a human being.
This is not a simple thing.
This same ‘me’ which can make a banana into a human being also created the whole cosmic scape.
It’s not a different ‘me.’
So, the choice is just this –
either you can exist here just as a piece of Creation
or you can exist here as the very Creator himself.
That’s the ultimate, for now.
There’s more to it, but for now. (Laughs)
Sadhguru: For one
who is
who is seeing this life as a stepping stone
for a larger possibility,
for him there is no failure.
For one who is looking at the simple events of this life itself
as the goal of life,
for him there is failure and success.
If you are just seeing this life as a stepping stone
for a larger possibility,
if you have a good deal you use that for your well-being;
if you have a bad deal you use that for your well-being.
The economy was on the boon
when every fool could be successful;
you know, didn’t take much.
When the economy is on the boon
everybody gets carried, isn't it?
Now there has been a meltdown.
Now it takes something else to be successful.
So when the economy was on the boom
you could have brought a certain dispassion
towards the money that’s flowing in.
Now the economy is down
the taps are all closed up.
It's time
to come
meditate
walk in the mountains;
there is lot of time.
There is lot of time on your hands, isn't it?
When there was money it took away your time and life.
Now the taps are closed;
lots of time;
this is the time.
So it doesn’t matter what the hell happens;
it doesn’t matter what the hell happens with your life,
if you are seeing this life
only as a stepping stone for a larger possibility
then whatever the situation
it is beautiful and very useful;
very very useful.
Once there was a farmer like you
who was tired of various natural factors ruling his
the quality of his crop.
So one day he called Shiva.
It was a wild card entry.
So he found access
and Shiva said,
‘What?’
He said, ‘I am tired of all the natural nonsense happening;
obviously you are not a farmer.
I know from history that you were a hunter.
You were not a farmer.
You don't know what it means to farm.
Why don’t you leave the nature in my hands?
I am a farmer.
I know when it should rain;
I know when there should be sunlight;
I know when there should be wind;
I know what, everything.
You don't know because you are just a hunter
and you are a crazy ascetic.
You definitely not a good farmer.
The wrong times it's raining;
at wrong times things are happening;
you leave it to me.’
Shiva was one of those moods, he said,
‘Okay,
nature is in your hands.’
Then the farmer planned his crop;
planted
a maize crop.
‘Rain.’
Poke the land and see,
‘Okay it's soaked up to six inches,’
‘Stop.’
Then plough it, planted,
wait for two days,
Rain
Hum ‘Sunlight.’
Today I’m working in the field, ‘
cloud
So everything just happened the way he wanted,
a beautiful maize crop came.
He was overjoyed.
‘See, it's good; nature should be in farmer’s hands.’
And then when the time to harvest came
he wanted to see because none of the birds were coming;
he was surprised
because that also he said, ‘No birds.’ - No birds.
Then he went and opened and saw nice big everything
but he opened and saw - no grain inside.
Then he thought
‘What the hell is this?
What did I do wrong?’
Then he couldn’t figure out
because rain, water, sunshine, everything he managed properly.
Then again he went back to Shiva
but he was in this condition.
He waited for many years for him to open his eyes.
By the time his… you know,
these many years the fields and the family, everything went to..,
but he wanted to know the answer,
what went wrong?
He is farmer first.
Then when Shiva opened his eyes;
he asked,
‘I did everything right but there is no grain.
Did you sabotage my crop?’
Shiva said, ‘I have been watching;
you were doing …you were in-charge
so I didn’t want to interfere.
The rain was great,
the sunshine was great,
everything was fine
but you stopped all the winds.
I used to always send fierce winds which would threaten your crop
but because the plants felt pushed and threatened they put their roots deeper into the earth,
so grain happened.
Now you have great maize crop,
no maize.’
So various situations in your life
either you can use it
to make yourself stronger and better
or you can sit and cry.
This is the choice you have.
Everything;
it doesn’t matter what happens;
the most horrific event happened in your life
that also can be used for your growth and your well-being
if only if you have clearly seen the small events of your life
When I say small events
I mean your business, your marriage, your children
all those big things.
All these things are just a stepping stone.
This is not new to you
because in this culture they put this into you for centuries,
for millenniums, they told you,
‘Your life is about mukthi.
Your marriage,
your business,
your social life
these are all just means to get there.
Either you go with it or you go without it
but whether you are a sanyasi or you are in the samsara
your only goal is mukthi.’
Yes?
The goal was not just for the sanyasi;
for everybody it is mukthi.
If you walk alone you walk alone.
You want party going with you,
you walk with the party.
That’s your choice.
You want to get there quick,
you walk alone.
You want to go there having picnic on the way, slowly,
you go with people.
Choice is yours
but the important thing is whatever the hell you are doing there is only one goal.
So if you have set this up
then all the events of life, everything is beneficial.
The boom is beneficial;
the meltdown is even more than beneficial actually.
It is also ecologically very good, you know, the meltdown?
No?
So the fear of failure
failure is bad enough;
fear is adding spice to it, isn't it?
Success happens to you not because you desire it,
because you earn it.
Everybody desires it.
it comes only if you are capable isn't it?
Dr. Mahesh Sharma: Thank you Sadhguruji.
You gave me opportunity to mark this
celebration of Guru Poornima utsav with this much big presence over here.
But a big question comes to my mind that
we keep, and especially the Indians keep after the God and parents, guru at the highest esteem.
But we have not been able to make Guru Poornima celebration utsav
in the same spirit of high spirit as we respect the gurus.
Sadhguru: The reason why Guru Poornima and so many other things,
which were of great spiritual importance in this country,
have slid back into the background of our lives is
because we have been an occupied nation for a period of time
and whatever the framework that the occupying forces set for us,
when we got our independence,
we should have looked at what kind of framework we want for our nation.
We did not do that.
We just allowed the same framework to continue.
For example,
in this country,
right from ancient times,
even for a farmer who ploughs the land,
even today many farmers don’t set their plough on their land on Monday mornings.
Yes?
In Tamil Nadu, it’s still true.
In the north, it’s been given up
because no… no animals being used,
all tractors.
You have to
You have taken a bank loan, the interest is ticking,
so you want it to run all the seven days (Laughs),
all these things.
When the British came,
they changed these things
because they
they knew the strength of this nation was essentially in the culture.
So they wanted to break the culture.
Very systematically, they engineered how to break the culture.
They made you Sunday holiday.
What are you going to do on Sunday?
Watch television and eat potato chips (Laughter)?
What are you going to do on Sunday?
They had an intention for a Sunday morning.
What is the intention for the majority of the population in this country on Sunday morning?
There is nothing for us to do on Sunday morning.
Monday morning, there’re lots of things happening,
but you have to go to office.
For a long time in this country,
the monthly holidays were like this
pournami means… every pournami means three days holiday
one day before, the day and the next day,
amavasya means two days holiday (Applause).
These
These two days of full moon day and new moon day
have something to do with our system (Referring to oneself),
something to do with the planet,
something to do with the very way we’re born.
We are physically here today
only because our mothers’ bodies were in sync with the cycles of the moon,
otherwise we won’t be here.
So, there are things which are happening in your system.
As you know, the very oceans are rising on these days.
When such a massive body of water is rising up,
this body (Referring to oneself)
which is over seventy percent water,
you think nothing is rising in this (Referring to oneself)?
That… The… Those days were kept as spiritually significant days,
those are not the days to go to work,
those are the days to focus upon yourself.
So, similarly the Guru Poornima used to be a huge festival across the… this whole region,
but it’s gone because people have to go to work.
So, I request you,
being… you being a minister in the Union Cabinet,
this is something that you must do (Applause),
that… I know for you to pitch for every pournima
pournami being a holiday is not going to be practical.
But at least Guru Poornima (Applause),
if you
From the central government, if you declare Guru Poornima as a holiday,
I will make sure
Guru Poornima is celebrated across this country (Applause)
with great fervor (Applause)
because… because the spirit is still alive.
There is no space for expression.
There is no space or time for expression.
Please, if you can do this one thing,
and we can make Guru Poornima a big tourism attraction for this country (Laughter/Applause)
as… as I have already spoken to you about making
India the spiritual gateway,
Guru Poornima can be the day which really draws spiritual tourists from across the world to this country.
So, even as a part of your job (Laughter),
it’s a good thing to do (Laughs) (Applause).
[Sadhguru] It's a very good thing that they called it 'The God particle.'
It seems somebody wanted to call it the goddamn particle
so they just put God particle and that's a very clever ploy... marketing ploy.
You must be glad that scientists are becoming market savvy.
They have always been in a subtle way, now they are getting little overt.
So, you know for most people their idea of science is just
the new telephone model that's coming up, the next model of I-phone is their idea of science.
All these people who never, ever were interested in any kind of physics,
now talking about particle physics, world over, everybody is talking about particle physics, that's an achievement.
Breaking a proton and coming up with the boson - is that an achievement that needs to be seen?
But it's definitely an achievement that suddenly the whole world,
at least the educated part of the world is thinking particle physics - that's an achievement.
That's a good achievement, at least people are thinking of science
as not a way of milking the existence, not entirely, at least a little bit.
They're willing to spend ten billion dollars just to know something; I like that.
There is right now no technological use but they're willing to spend
ten billion dollars and thirty years just to know something.
That sounds very spiritual to me it ...usually doesn't cost that much but...
So having achieved one thing, having made a social goal, scientifically what does it mean?
In yoga we see it this way; there is......existence is like this, there is something called as
'sthoola', 'sookshma', 'shoonya', 'Shiva'.
'Sthoola' means the gross existence, physicality is sthoola.
Everything that you can see, everything that you can sense through five sense organs,
everything that you can see, smell, taste, hear and touch is considered sthoola.
This can be analyzed with your intellect and understood and grasped.
And this is always made of, as we know today of 'anu' or 'atoms' because it's physical in nature.
It's a complete block of... building block of existence is an atom and if it's made of an atom,
once enough number of atoms are there we can touch it, we can smell it, we can taste it,
we can see it if it becomes big enough, initially in a microscope,
after that with our bare eyes we could see it. But if it goes beyond the perception
of the five senses but still it is physical in nature, we call it 'Sookshma'.
So when you enter into Sookshma, it is still physical but you are not able to grasp it;
do what you want you cannot grasp it through five senses
nor can you analyze it through your intellect, that dimension if we approach it,
we call it 'Vishesha gnan' or 'Vishesha gnana,' that means an extra-ordinary knowledge.
Gyan or gnana means knowledge, Vishesh gnan is extra-ordinary or significant knowledge.
So Visheshgnan is referred to as 'Vigyan'.
The word Vigyan is being very loosely used today but essentially it means this --
those dimensions which cannot be perceived through five senses, if you perceive them, that is Vigyan.
So today science is entering those spaces because never, ever is anybody going to see... a Higgs boson.
They are only going to see its footprint. Even now they only saw the footprint;
they did not see a Higgs boson. But because they see the footprint, they believe he is there.
Somebody has gone by, they left the footprints. We have not seen the man but we know it's gone by.
We go into the forest, we see the pugmarks and we say, 'Okay there is a tiger.'
We haven't seen the tiger. In fact in a tropical forest it's very difficult to see a tiger but we will see pugmarks here and there.
Just like that they saw the footprint. So they are entering vishesh gyan.
If you go further it will become 'Shoonya' that means absolute emptiness.
There your intellect will be completely useless, your senses will be completely useless
because there is no physicality. Where there is no physicality your sense organs
and intellect will become absolutely redundant.
If you go beyond shoonya there is something that we refer to as Shi-va.
When I say Shiva don't imagine that calendar man from Shivakasi. Shi-va means 'that which is not'.
If you touch 'that which is not' -- we have always seen it is not physical in nature.
It is not physical in nature means it does not exist but it is opaque.
How can that be? It is not in the realm of your logical mind.
Today modern science believes the whole existence has to oblige to human logic
which is a very limited way of approaching life. The whole existence will not oblige to human logic.
You think you can fit the whole existence into your head. No, no, your head fits into the existence,
the existence will not fit into your head. Your logic can analyze the physicality of the existence.
Once you cross the physical dimension your logic is completely out of its realm.
So there are,... because this is a dialectical culture,
the same science has been expressed in story forms.
I cannot go into the whole story, it's a long story
but when I told this story to one of the top scientists in the world,
when I was speaking to him and I explained this, 'See this is how it is.
This is the nature of the existence.' This is from the yogic lore but we are always told
not to believe the lore till it becomes a reality in your experience.
And this is the reality in my experience, if you go like this, this is what will happen.
So when I spoke to this very top-level scientist who is a Nobel Laureate
and I was telling him that this is what it is
There was a group of them and when I explained this is how it is within me, what do you think?
They said, 'Sadhguru, if you can give a mathematical backbone to what you are talking,
this is Nobel Prize stuff. Can you give a mathematical background?'
I said, 'I'll never bother about the mathematics.
It's true for me and it's transformed everything that I am because it's true for me;
everything that I ever was changed simply because I touched this dimension within me.
I don't wish to work equations for that and anyway Nobel Prize wouldn't mean anything to me.
I would be too embarrassed by such things.
So this story I will... because I will make it so brief there could be holes in it.
If I make it elaborate enough there will be no holes in the story; it's a perfect theory.
And we have proved it within ourselves that it is true but you want to build a
ten billion dollar instrument under the ground to prove the same thing; it's up to you.
This can be experientially proved within yourself if you are willing to go into the
depths of what this is because this is made exactly the same way the whole universe is made.
If you go deep enough into this and you know how this is made,
by inference you know how everything in the universe is made,
by inference and even now science is also only inferring.
Today modern science has admitted that it's an ever-expanding universe or an endless universe,
rather ever expanding is a yogic term, they are calling it a endless universe.
If it's an endless universe, trying to travel across the universe and
find out the nature of the universe is untenable, isn't it? Simply out of question.
The only way you could know the nature of the universe, nature of the creation
and the source of creation is by going inward because whatever you ate in the morning
whether it's a idly or a dosa or a banana has been transformed into a human being
in the last few hours. Nobody else can do this except the source of creation.
So if the source of creation is right here if you want to know anything about creation,
isn't it the best place to consult?
If you want to know anything about creation, isn't the source of creation the best place to consult?
And if you had to go to heaven for this you could give it up;
if it is right here why don't you consult?
Simply because you're too enamored by your own thought.
You think you are going to capture the whole universe with your thoughts.
It is a foolish way to approach. The only reason why science has survived is because of technology.
It keeps throwing out technologies. If no technologies were coming out of science,
they were just talking about all the things that they have been talking,
people would have beaten them down for the money that they spent.
And it's happened in the past when there were no technologies
and people just spoke science they were beaten down, isn't it?
So science has its value in terms of utility but science cannot open up the existence for human experience.
It will not, it can never do it because they are going with intellect.
Intellect, as an instrument works only to dissect.
The only way intellect can approach anything is to break it up and see.
If you ask a scientist to find out something about this flower first thing is he will break it up into pieces.
I think I should ask a scientist to make me understand one of you.
He will talk about dissecting you then. If you break this up you may know many parts of this,
you may know the structure of it, you may know the chemistry of it
but you will not know the beauty of it, you will not know the completeness of it
because the flower is an expression of a plant finding its fulfillment.
It is the highest thing for the plant. For its life this is the highest happening;
it's the flowering of that life. You will not know that.
You will not see the hand of the Creator in this if you break it up but as a whole,
if you are willing to pay attention, absolute attention; if, in your approach
you make this flower more important than yourself and keep your focus on it
you will see the whole universe in this. If you break it up you will have petals,
you will have other parts of the flower and you'll come to vulgar conclusions
and then you will learn how to make use of it.
So right now unfortunately our approach, what we call as science has become like this
'How to use everything in the universe for our benefit?' If you see a tree
In America they call it wood. I was, this happened when I was in college.
This happened about four years ago when I was in Mysore, for the first time
I conducted a program after many, many years and all kinds of people turned up.
My teachers from school and college turned up. They wanted to see
what has happened to me. So after I spoke there and we had two-day event and
then my English teacher came and hugged me and she said,
'Now I know why you wouldn't let me teach Robert Frost.'
I said, 'Why Madam, why would I not let you teach Robert Frost, I like Frost?'
She said, 'No, do you remember you wouldn't let me teach Frost?'
Then I remembered. One day she came and she opened the book
and she introduced Robert Frost as a glorious poet and then she started off,
'Woods are lovely, dark and deep.' I said, 'Stop!' I said
'A man who calls a tree, a wood, I don't want to listen to him.'
She said, 'No, no, Robert Frost is a great poet.' I said, 'I don't care how great he is;
a man who calls a tree a wood, I will not listen to him.' I didn't let her teach.
I didn't let her teach Frost. So after many years she comes up to me and she says,
'Now I know why you wouldn't let...'...
So if a tiger comes here now from the mountains I mean, if you come from Sri Lanka, that's different.
If a tiger comes down from the mountain, looks at you he will think, 'Wow! Dinner.'
So you look at a tree and you think 'Wood.' It's all right for a tiger to do that
because that's all he knows but it's not all right for you to do that, isn't it?
But right now that is all science has become. Anything we see how to make use of it,
anything we see how to make use of it. Even an invisible atom we won't leave.
Even the goddamn boson already people are talking about in how many ways it could be used.
We could make a 'boson bomb' do you understand?
If we make a boson bomb, all of you will just vanish;
we don't even have to deal with your dead bodies,
yes, because you will cease to exist just like the boson.
Instead of shooting you dead or burning you to death, if we make all the protons in
your body collide with each other- phew'- you will just vanish. You want the technology?
But they will tell you, 'No, no, no there could be medical uses to it.
We could do this, we could do that.'
Yes I know all that but just the idea; it doesn't matter what, you cannot look at anything
without thinking, 'In what way can I make use of it' is a very gross way to exist.
With this level of existence you will have everything and you will have nothing.
This is modern life. People have everything like never before and they got
nothing in their lives, nothing that you can call of any worth.
People who have everything and cannot feel life in any significant way,
when they die or when the moment of death comes they will see that they spent
these whatever number of years without living a moment because
'what can I get, what can I get' is a sure way not to live, because from what you get
you can only make a living, it's only by what you give that you make a life.
So giving does not mean money or something else or something else, it is just that
this moment if you look at this tree how totally you can give yourself to this tree,
that is how intensely you know life. If you sit here and calculate
'What can I get out of this tree' you will completely miss life, completely.
Life will evade you.
So this kind of science which denies you life should be restricted if you ask me.
I know I am going to be hugely unpopular because somebody is going to twitter and say
'Sadhguru says science should be curtailed.' It's all right.
I am telling you a science which is driven just by 'What can I get out of it'
needs to be controlled a bit, otherwise human beings will have everything and they'll have nothing.
When that is your experience then you will destroy everything.
Today the planet is not being destroyed because of something else.
It is just unbridled use of technology, isn't it? It could have been used for our well-being
but it's working against us because we have not worked the other dimensions of life,
we are just going with this '"What can I get, what can I get?'"
If you go with this, there will be no planet left after some time.
But even if the planet is left, suppose we rope in another ten planets
still it will not be enough. We will still have nothing, we will have everything.
This is my experience.
Science should have been just a quest to know,
not to exploit the creation. It is just a longing to know.
Human longing to know, wants to find expression in every possible way.
Physical science is it's one of the ways, perfectly fine but once it starts serving
the masters who sponsor it, then, if businesses sponsor it, they are looking for profit from it,
if nation sponsor it they are looking how to make more powerful weapons out of it, all the time.
You must understand this:
The cutting-edge science always first becomes cutting-edge military technology,
only after that it comes down to other uses.
How many lives has it taken, how many more do we want to take? That's the question.
So this goddamn particle, one good thing it's done is the whole world is thinking particle physics, I like that.
That's nice, but do you know the boson is named after Satyendranath Bose?
You know this? No? It's an Indian mathematician, a self-taught mathematician.
As Albert Einstein acknowledged, he said,
'The western sciences couldn't take a single step without the Indian mathematicians.
The fundamentals of mathematics came from the East but always here the other ethos of the culture said,
'You should not do anything that's exploitative to nature' because nature was seen as 'Mother Nature'.
You don't go about raping Mother Nature. You take only what you need, nothing more.
Because of that attitude this science was not converted into technology
and that is the wisest way to handle science -- just as a quest, a tool, a way to know
and nothing beyond that and technology must be really controlled.
What is absolutely needed, that's all that should be done. This unbridled usage --
already people are talking how to use the boson that they have not seen,
when we can use the atom that we have not seen. So it doesn't matter what you see,
you are thinking of how to use it. This attitude unfortunately has been
further fueled by the attitude of science. This needs to be checked, otherwise it will be our nemesis.
It will for sure be a goddamn everything.
(Sadhguru): You would notice
they would be much more joyful
From pursuit of happiness
to expression of joy
if you do not shift
there is really no solution for anything
(Sadhguru): Essentially the difference between Ayurveda and siddha and
allopathy is just this –
allopathy is purely chemicals,
chemical manipulation of the system.
When it's an emergency,
you must use it.
But if it's a long… you know if it's a chronic ailment
which is going to be with you for a long time
and you’re going to take some medicine for a long time,
definitely popping pills for long periods of time is not a good thing.
So Ayurveda is herbal;
herbs are also chemicals but in natural form.
It’s way better than taking it in a synthetic form.
Ayurveda needs a certain amount of application and knowledge because
there are over three hundred thousand
okay?
Three hundred thousand Ayurvedic formulations
according to the ancient texts.
Three hundred thousand formulations you have to understand
if you have to really prescribe Ayurveda.
So prescribing or practicing Ayurveda is a
it needs a lifelong involvement.
These days I see people come from outside the country;
they study Ayurveda for one-and-a-half months
and they are certified ayurvedic teachers or doctors,
practitioners,
which is a very dangerous thing to do.
Three hundred thousand formulations,
how to give it,
to whom to give it,
when to give it
is not a simple thing to understand, it takes a lot.
Above all you need a phenomenal understanding of the body
to be able to prescribe this.
Siddha is very different in the sense,
siddha is essentially elemental in nature.
This
there are herbs but essentially it's elemental in nature.
It comes more from the yogic science
because the fundamental of yogic science
is in Bhuta Shuddhi
or in cleansing of one’s elements.
This is an evolution from the yogic science
and siddha vaidya was essentially formulated by Agastya Muni
and they say Adiyogi himself practiced it
and Agastya brought it to the south and
only in the south, it lived;
nowhere else. And it's elemental in nature,
which needs less study
but more internal mastery for the person,
who practices it,
which is again a problem today.
We hope these young people,
who are starting their sadhana at the age of six
and they are going to be in sadhana throughout their growing period,
these kind of people can take to siddha
very effortlessly
because the necessary sadhana is there within them.
Siddha vaidya cannot happen without sadhana.
Today they have set up colleges for siddha vaidya,
which
it will not work like that.
They’re picking up bits and pieces
from the text and trying to practice that –
quackery
siddha quackery is happening;
siddhavaidya is not happening
because siddha vaidya has to be practiced by a siddha.
It is a siddha who can practice siddha vaidya.
Siddha means an established one;
one who is firmly established within himself
because it's elemental in nature.
Because it's elemental,
it's not really a medicine as such.
You are dealing with the fundamental material
which makes the body
you are not trying to infuse some other medicine into it.
So usage of metals is very much prevalent in siddha.
I know the western medicine will immediately brand it
as nonsense
but in siddha,
all the things that you consider as poisonous are used
as a part of their medicine.
Nine deadly poisons
you heard of NavaPashana
all the nine deadly poisons are used as medicine.
Lead is very frequently used;
mercury is regularly used.
So Rasa Vaidya is very much part of siddha vaidya
and for those of you who’re calling for God’s help
when I mention the word mercury,
mercury is not poisonous,
it is just with mercury oxides people have poisoned water.
It is irresponsible usage in the industry,
which has done this.
There is mercury in the soil, okay?
We did not import mercury from Mars,
it's always been in this planet.
It is not poison.
It is mercury oxides,
which are irresponsibly used in industry
and let out into the rivers and lakes,
which poisoned the waters on this planet.
Now they think mercury is poison.
No, mercury is not poison
but if you drink it,
it’ll kill you
not because you can absorb it as poison;
it is because of its sheer weight.
If you put it into the stomach
it will not go through the pipe,
it will just drip through the stomach
because of its sheer weight,
because it's specific gravity is almost
fourteen times that of water,
because of that …because of sheer weight –
if you place it in your hands
it just goes into your hand through the pores.
Similarly if you put it into the stomach
it will go through the stomach,
it will not go through the intestine.
Because of that,
it may kill you because it bores holes,
not because it's acidic,
simply because of sheer weight.
But consumption of mercury is very much a part of the yogic system
and very much a part of the siddha vaidya.
I am still alive only because of mercury,
not otherwise.
So siddha is a very completely different kind of medicine system
than anything that you’ll find on the planet
but it needs a siddha to give siddha medicine.
If you are not established,
if you can't hold the mercury,
you don’t give mercury to somebody else.
Yogic system has always used mercury.
Mercury and yogis are always together.
you cannot
even you will see traveling yogis
will carry a little bit of mercury with them always,
if not in liquid form,
in solid form,
solidified mercury.
People do practices,
keeping it in their mouth and doing things and whatever.
There’re various aspects to it.
Nobody try that here, okay?
We don’t want you dead.
It's not just bad things that kill you,
good things that you’re not ready for can kill you.
Shekhar Kapur: And one last question,
because I know people will say,
“Well, why didn’t you ask him about stress?” (Sadhguru Laughs)
And I’ll say, “Well…” Because I don’t understand
I cannot define stress. (Sadhguru Laughs)
There’re a lot of the things that
a lot of the questions people ask me,
and very well know that
since I’ve been interviewing you, they’ll say
but I know that the
we get addicted to keywords,
but is there a… is there, I mean, what is
is there a definition that we can assign to the idea of stress?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) I must tell you this.
When I first went to United States a few years ago,
wherever I went,
everybody was talking about stress management.
I really couldn’t understand this,
because in my understanding
we manage things which are precious to us, okay? (Laughs)
Shekhar Kapur: All right. (Laughs) Okay.
Sadhguru: Our business, our family
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: …our money, our wealth, our children
we manage all these things because these are all things precious to us.
Why would anybody manage stress?
I couldn’t get this. (Both Laugh)
When this word was thrown at me everywhere,
“Stress management,
stress management,”
I said, “Why manage stress?”
It took me a while to understand these people have concluded that
stress is a part of their life.
Stress is not a part of your life.
Stress is just your inability to manage your own system.
Stress is not because of the nature of your work.
The Prime Minister is complaining of stress.
The chapparasi also complaining of stress.
In between, every other person saying
his job is stressful
and unemployed are stressful. (Claps) (Laughs)
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: They don’t have anything to do (Laughs) –
that also they’re stressful.
So you’re suffering your job. If I get you fired, will you be joyful?
Shekhar Kapur: No.
Sadhguru: No. So, stress is not about your job, obviously, isn't it?
It is just that you do not know how to manage your body,
how to manage your mind,
how to manage your emotions, your energy, your chemistry,
you do not know how to manage anything!
You’re functioning by accident, so everything is stressful.
you get into a car without a steering wheel
or you get into a car, if you turn this way (Gestures), it goes in the opposite direction
you will be stressful, isn't it?
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: So right now that’s the kind of mechanism you’re driving.
Without understanding anything about it,
just by chance you’re going, blundering through life
you will be stressful.
So stress is not because of the nature of the activity that you’re performing,
not because of life situations.
Stress is simply because you do not know how to manage your
your own system.
What is stressful for you,
somebody is breezing through it. Isn't it so?
Shekhar Kapur: Correct.
Sadhguru: stress is not situational.
It is just an inability to manage the inner situation,
not the outer situation.
Sadhguru: Essentially the quality of our lives
change and transform
not because we change the content of our lives
only because we have changed the context of our life.
Someone is living a beautiful life does not mean
he’s doing something different when he wakes up in the morning.
He also goes to the toilet.
He also brushes his teeth.
He also does the same things.
But somehow his life is magical and beautiful
because of the context.
This could have happened to people when they fall in love with somebody.
They were doing the same thing, suddenly they are in love with someone,
suddenly everything is different
because the context of their life has changed.
But then once they fall out of it,
again (Laughs) the context of their life changes and it becomes miserable.
Now, changing the context is something which is voluntary,
which is just something that you can do willfully.
Changing the content may not be possible as you will.
Because to change the content of your life,
you need permission from the situations in which you exist, isn't it?
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: But to change the context of life, you don’t need anybody’s permission.
You… it is not at all situational.
So on a certain day,
three men were working in one place.
another man came by and asked the first man,
“What are you doing here?”
This man looked up and said,
“Can’t you see I’m cutting stone? Are you blind?”
This man moved on to the next man and asked,
“What are you doing here?”
That man looked up and said,
“Something… something to fill my belly.
I come here and do whatever they ask me to do.
I just have to fill my belly, that’s all.”
He went to the next man, the third man and asked,
“What are you doing here?”
That man stood up in great joy and said,
“I’m building a beautiful temple here!”
All of them are doing the same thing,
but their experience of what they’re doing is worlds apart.
Every human being,
every moment of his life could be doing whatever he is doing
in any one of these three contexts
and that’ll determine the quality of his life,
not what he is actually doing.
How simple an activity you’re doing
or how complex an activity you’re doing doesn’t change the
the quality of your life.
With what context are you doing, changes the quality of your life, isn't it?
Shekhar Kapur: Completely.
Barkha Dutt: We live in times when
faith and spirituality have become very inflammable
Sadhguru: Don’t put them in the same basket.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let’s talk about faith first.
Sadhguru: Mhmm
Barkha Dutt: We live in times when faith for certain has become a very inflammable,
easily politicized conversation.
If faith should have been personal today, it’s not.
Today you actually have decisions taken in the name of somebody’s faith being injured.
So you mentioned food right now,
I read somewhere that you said there’s nothing religious about the act of food,
just eat what you like.
Sadhguru: No, no, no, I didn’t say that.
Barkha Dutt: Eat what’s good for you?
Sadhguru: I said eat what’s good for you.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, eat what’s good for you.
Sadhguru: It’s a very different thing (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: I correct myself (Sadhguru laughs) – eat what’s good for you.
But today we have a highly politicized conversation around banning beef
in the name of faith.
How
Sadhguru: It’s definitely not good for you to eat it.
Barkha Dutt: Beef or any meat?
Sadhguru: I’ll come to that.
Finish it, finish the question.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, okay.
So I’m offering that as one example of
how I see a politicized conversation taking place around faith.
How do you reconcile the faith of a large number of people
with questions of individual liberty?
I know I have read that you like books written by Salman Rushdie.
We were the first country to ban him again in the name of faith.
How do we reconcile faith with individual liberty?
Sadhguru: See, it’s always been said “faith moves mountains.”
Yes, but it freezes your mind.
But the greatest crime you can do on this planet is to move a mountain.
You should not move a mountain, it should be where it is,
it has not just dropped from somewhere,
it’s grown because of various forces functioning in a particular way,
phenomenal activity has happened to build a mountain.
You should never move a mountain
but (Laughs) people with frozen minds always want to move a mountain,
okay?
Having said that,
when we say faith, it’s an import for this culture.
We have never had faith in this culture.
You must look back little beyond thousand years
since we’ve been under occupation.
Here, we have been told always,
“Your life is your karma.”
Karma means action.
Whose action?
Your action.
So what we are saying is your life is entirely your making.
There is no someone sitting up there and managing this for you.
This is entirely yours
but for every action that you perform
whether physical, mental, emotional, energy-wise -
whatever kind of action you perform, there is bound to be a consequence.
If you’re ready for the consequence, do whatever.
If you’re going to cry about the consequence, control the action right now.
Based on this
Now you came to food,
see the food consumption has been looked at very carefully in this country.
If you just bring this back, the world will be healthy, do you understand?
Here, we have identified different type of people,
what they should eat.
If you’re doing menial jobs, how you should eat.
If you’re doing trading, how you should eat.
If you’re into spiritual process, how you should eat.
If you’re into education, how you should eat.
Why this is is each person needs a different type of building of the body.
You want to run hundred meters next to Mr. Bolt,
what kind of food you should eat.
You just want to work in Delhi, what kind of food you should eat.
You want to think in a certain way, what kind of food you’d… you should eat.
For all these, we have very clear prescriptions.
Now when it comes to food,
what it means is,
we are taking another life, whatever that is
it may be plant life, animal life, whatever
you’re taking another life, ingesting it and you have to make it your life –
that’s the whole thing.
What is your life,
what is that life,
if you look at it,
all life on this planet is coming from the earth.
This body (Gestures) is also the same soil,
this (Gestures) is also same soil,
if there is a (an?) earthworm, that is also same soil
but see how it has become, how this (Gestures) has become,
how that (Gestures) has become.
If I give you… You like a mango or a banana?
Barkha Dutt: Mango.
Sadhguru: Mango.
I know, (Laughs)
you’re ruling the state right now (Referring to the Aam Aadmi party (translates as The Common Man party),
Now, if you eat a mango, this mango becomes a woman in you.
If I eat a mango, the same mango becomes a man in me.
If a cow eats a mango, the same mango becomes a cow in the cow.
Why is this happening?
There is a certain information or software in you
whatever you eat it transforms it into a woman.
If I eat, it transforms into a man.
If a cow eats, that becomes a cow.
So every life is happening the way it is happening
because of a certain dimension of information
or in modern terminology, let’s call it software.
There is a certain software, which is an arrangement of information.
Now, the idea is to eat as simple a software as possible.
If you eat that kind of life,
which is a very simple software,
your ability to override that software and make it entirely a part of you is very good.
As that software gets complex, more and more complex,
your ability to integrate it goes down.
So, especially if it’s a creature
which has some sense of thought and emotion,
if it has emotion, then you should not eat it.
This is the understanding.
An animal, which has any emotion,
displays certain emotions
especially if it displays emotion which is near to human emotion,
you should not eat it because
it will not integrate itself.
That animal nature will start manifesting itself.
Or in other words, in India,
today maybe in cities people do not know,
you see in the villages,
people have very intimate relationship with a cow.
They have drunk the milk of that cow,
their children are drinking the milk of that cow,
there is a very deep relationship.
If you do not know this,
cow is one creature,
if something happens to you
and you are in some kind of grief or misery,
you don’t have to be near the cow,
wherever the cow is in your house, it will
it’ll start shedding tears for you.
You know, I’ve seen this with my eyes, I couldn’t believe –
when somebody is dead in the house it… what does a cow know, it is somewhere,
simply tears flowing.
So when it’s… has such deep emotions,
if you kill it, it’s like killing a human being,
it’s murder
or it’s cannibalism.
So because of that
this is not a faith thing,
this is not a religious thing,
we thought this is a fundamental sense. Why
When we are hungry, why can’t I cut you up and eat you?
What’s wrong (Laughter)?
What’s wrong, I’m asking?
Barkha Dutt: But what you’re saying should be about many more animals than just the cow.
Sadhguru: Yes, yes of course.
Barkha Dutt: And when it becomes about only the cow,
then there is a… there is certainly a perception
Sadhguru: I… It is not
Barkha Dutt: …that it is a political decision or a religious decision.
Sadhguru: No, no, I am not talking about the
whatever the laws that are happ
Barkha Dutt: This is not about people getting up and saying,
“It’s cruel to be… to be a meat-eater.”
That would be a different argument.
Sadhguru: Hmm, I am not even talking about cruelty.
Even cutting a plant is cruel, in my experience
but you have to do it.
But if you are conscious of it, you will do it to the minimum possible extent,
not do it wantonly, that’s the whole thing.
Now, about this political ban about cow slaughter or whatever,
this has many things.
One thing is there is a sensitivity,
once you drink milk from the cow,
she is like your mother.
Killing your mother and eating her up is something
people cannot digest in this country.
Still eighty percent of the people belong to that category
and they’re… they’re hugely
there’s a huge emotion,
such a (an?) emotion, which because
they’ve always been made to be docile in a certain way,
they have not violently … reacted to it
but in some places it has happened, in villages and other places.
There is already a beef ban in many villages just by norm,
not by any law,
that you don’t bring these kind of thin… things into the village.
I am not saying you must ban it or not ban it.
I am saying the sensitivities of your population,
you… without considering, you can’t go do this blatantly.
Because it is growing, it’s becoming a growing business;
India is becoming a major exporter of beef,
that’s not right.
Even if somebody ate something, it is up to them,
it’s their personal taste, whatever
but now you’re promoting it and you’re making it grow.
There is serious concern but our people don’t express it,
our people don’t go out on the street
and not going to kill anybody because they killed a cow.
So ban is not what is needed,
more education was needed rather than banning.
Barkha Dutt: But you haven’t spoken to
what happens when faith
Faith repeatedly seems to come into conflict with individual liberty
by the banning of books.
There were people killed in Paris
because they were seen to have mocked,
you know of the Prophet Mohammed and so on.
Sadhguru: See
Barkha Dutt: So where does this end?
Where do we stop violence and politics in the name of religion?
Sadhguru: If you… If you want that to stop,
you must understand this.
You’re saying, “Today, today.”
It’s not today.
In the last 2,000 years, this is the history of the world,
continuously it’s happening all over the world.
Barkha Dutt: So is that bombers are a new phenomenon?
Sadhguru: Well, you’ve forgotten about the Crusades and the other things,
which have not been reported in history (Laughs).
Hundreds of millions of people have been killed in the name of god, all right?
It’s new to us here,
but even here,
thousands… hundreds and thousands have been slaughtered in northern part of India
just because the faith that they belonged to
when the invasions happened.
Nobody writes about it because we never took the pen and wrote,
somebody wrote history for us the way they like it.
Because all history is sponsored by kings,
they wrote the history the way they want and they said they are great emperors
but what they did was absolutely terrible.
So you need to understand, faith is a new thing to us.
When I say new,
in this country which has 12-15,000 years of history behind us,
1,000 years is new for us,
we’ve still not come to terms with it;
we’re still struggling with it.
But struggling within ourselves,
not creating a struggle on the street because that’s not our nature
because here always we’ve (it’s?) been drilled into us,
whatever you do there’ll be a consequence for you.
Even if you come back another life, another life, it won’t leave you,
it’ll come back to you. Tch,
this has been told… This controls people,
this is a… This is a tremendous technology, please understand this,
and it’s not simply a fake thing, it is a real thing.
Everything that you think, feel, act, there is a consequence.
Not because there is somebody thinking he must give… gift
give you a reward or a punishment.
It happens in your own chemistry.

Sadhguru: To be successful in the world,
two fundamental qualities are that
you must be able to harness the prowess of your mind and your body.
If you want to harness the mind,
one most important quality is
you must know how to be equanimous
Equanimity gives you access to different dimensions of your mind.
If there is no equanimity,
in a skewed sense of mind,
your ability to use the mind is greatly reduced.
Another dimension is on the level of your energy,
both physiologically and internally, you must be exuberant.
Only when your energies are exuberant within you,
you have the ability to tide over various obstacles that one may face
in day-to-day activity towards one’s success.
If these two dimensions are brought into your mind and your body,
that you’re equanimous and you’re exuberant,
success will come to you much more easily.
But beyond this
to be successful,
one needs insight,
inspiration
and integrity.
Insight means you pay attention to life around you in such a way
that you are able to see something
that most people cannot see.
Another dimension is to be constantly be inspired.
So it’s very important,
the reason why you’re doing what you’re doing,
to look at the larger dimension
or the contribution that you’re making through your simple act
of whatever you may be doing in your life.
Every action that every human being performs in their life
is a contribution to some dimension of this world.
Somebody is benefitted by whatever you may be doing,
so being conscious of the contribution that you’re making
will keep you constantly inspired.
And integrity is very important
because when you want to function in this world,
how much trust
you have generated with all the people that you deal with on a daily basis
will determine how easy or how hard
your daily efforts are going to be.
If there is an atmosphere of trustfulness,
your ability to work will be
greatly, greatly enhanced
simply because everybody will pave the way for you,
rather than setting up impediments for you.
both the neurological and energy systems
branch out in a big way between the shoulder blades and above.
so keeping the neck region in a good condition is very important.
ute and be conscious of what sort of shadow you may be generating just by observing the slant of light and also be conscious about the various types of sounds occurring around you, small or big. Just pay attention to this, just learn to be precise for at least five minutes. In this, you will start generating clarity of mind.
[Questioner] You spoke about becoming a salt doll
and plunging into the ocean but what is that state like when you are a salt doll
but you have not yet plunged, what is… like can you describe that state what it is?
[Sadhguru] Aah, can somebody run to the kitchen and get a spoon-full of salt,
put it in his mouth he will know how it feels.
Salt is good only if in a small quantity it mixes with something, only if it mixes.
If you found this big ball of salt in your sambar… if it mixes then only it's good.
It’s merged, if not with the samundar [Ocean] at least with sambar;
only when it merges with something it is good. If it sticks out salt is bad, you know.
So that’s how life will feel, if you stick out that’s how it feels.
Most people on this planet do not know a moment of absolute ease,
forget about blissfulness, forget about ecstasy, forget about anything else, they do not know what is ease.
It's the most basic thing; lot of other creatures know this.
You see, a dog has eaten well, okay totally at ease.
Human beings do not know what is ease; most people do not know what is ease.
That’s why they have so much disease. Yes. To simply be able to sit here, just to simply sit –
no, it's going on all the time. So that’s how life will be because you’re too full of salt.
You know these terms are used in so many different ways.
When we say salt, it's the essence in a way.
If you say ‘salt of the earth’ it means the essence of it you’ve taken.
So when we say you are a salt doll or if you become one it is the essence.
The essence of your personality right now is just
your ideas, your emotions, your opinions, a bundle of prejudices that you carry;
this is what the essence of your personality and this may be hugely fired by the karmic influence.
Memory, this is what makes you who you are. So this is your salt.
The essence of your personality is just what you remember of yesterday or the previous moment.
We just wipe out your memory from all levels not just from your mind,
including your body if you wipe out all memory, there will be no such thing as a person anywhere.
If there is no person there is just life. If there is just life, if you sit here
just as a piece of life you will throb as life. If you throb as life
you will instantly experience that life is happening in tandem with the whole Existence,
never separately because it cannot exist separately and never ever has it happened separately,
always one with everything. It is only your personality which is happening separately.
That is the salt - your ideas, your opinions, your philosophies, your ideologies –
when you complicate your ideas it becomes an ideology,
your emotions which are just another expression of the same thing, your prejudices –
another expression of the same thing. Essentially you are investing in your memory
or essentially you invest in that which is dead.
You are an undertaker. Your business is with the dead.
All the time your life is about what is over. Everything that you are is about what is already over.
So because you are an undertaker you will live in a certain jumpy condition.
(Sadhguru): In this culture, they taught you,
if you have to eat your food, first you bow down to it.
You are not saying thank you to any god, okay?
Please don’t do this.
If at all if you want to thank the… somebody,
thank that poor farmer
who doesn’t eat what he grows and gives it to you (Applause).
We are not thanking any gods,
we are not looking up and saying thanks for the daily bread whatever.
We’re just bowing down to the food
because we know how you treat the food,
accordingly it behaves within you.
Today, there is enormous amount of study, which shows
For example, water –
this water (Gestures) has enormous memory.
If I just as much as look at it in a certain way,
its molecular composition changes,
not the chemical composition
but the molecular composition changes
and it behaves differently.
Lot of experimentation has happened about this
and today, they’ve come up with something called imploding water,
where some of you might have experienced this.
Suppose you went to a waterfall
and the water that is falling with great force,
if you touch the water, it feels silky.
Have you ever noticed this?
Yes?
If it goes down two miles and then touch it,
it won’t feel like that.
Only there, it feels silky because the water is imploding into itself.
Now they’ve created imploding machines,
you can implode the water and you feed this water to your plants.
With ten percent of irrigation,
you can get the same results,
simply because the water is imploded.
These imploding machines, which were made in UK,
we are kind of getting them for the local farmers,
so that the water is imploded.
With minimal water ,you can grow the same crops
because just changing the molecular composition changes so much.
We’ve always known this.
This is why
Why do you think people go to a temple (Laughs)
and they are dying for that two drops of water?
Because the water is supposed to have the memory of the divine,
supposed to be in touch with the deity
and there is supposed to be memory
and you take it and it’s supposed to work,
if it… this whole science is managed properly
but today, we don’t know how it is in most of the places
but the possibility of changing the
how the water behaves within you,
just by treating it differently.
Before drinking,
just bow down to the water.
Don’t see it as a commodity,
it’s not a commodity,
it is life-making ingredient.
This (Gestures) is more important than your mother, father, your children, anybody. Isn’t it so?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: What is in this vessel right now?
Please tell me I want you to hear that.
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes, because if you don’t drink it for one day,
you will not want anybody (Laughter), you want only this (Referring to water).
No, we ar… We are talking about the real thing (Laughter).
So the five elements,
if you learn to handle them properly,
simple thing,
whatever – the earth that you walk upon,
the air that you breathe,
water that you drink,
food that you eat and the sky –
three times a day consciously just (Gestures doing namaskar)
put your hands together for these things.
These are the life-making ingredients,
your life is made out of this.
Just approach it differently,
you will see your health situation,
your sense of well-being, your stability,
everything will be greatly enhanced.
If you want to do proper practice of bhuta shuddhi,
please come, we have elaborate systems of bhuta shuddhi.
Probably nowhere else in the world right now
these kinds of systems are offered
but they will need a certain amount of preparation
and absolute dedication to pursue that (Applause).
Participant: My question is to Sadhguru.
We heard Mr. Mariwala talk about a whole scientific process of
generating insights and how he has trainings
and then he has teams that pair up, and then there’s observations that are recorded.
I just wanted to ask you
every word that you speak resonates and connects with so many of us.
What is your process of gathering insights?
Sadhguru: Oh. (Laughs)
My process of gathering insights is to just look at things as they are
I do not contaminate any situation that I enter into with myself.
Simply looking at it, the way it is.
If you simply look at it, everything is laid out right there.
The only person who stands between you and what is in front of you, is yourself.
If you remove that one thing,
you will see everything just the way it is.
So it’s a pretty simple process,
but because most people have worked in the reverse direction for a long time,
it looks like a very difficult thing
it is not.
When you drive a team, there are two aspects to it.
One thing is you have to make everybody get engaged with what they’re doing,
have as much insight into whatever little things they’re fulfilling
the little pieces of the whole larger piece.
At the same time,
you might have seen through the whole thing,
but still you have to allow the team a learning process that
and make them feel they arrived there by themselves,
which is a very subtle operation.
Even if you know it, if you spell it out and say, “Just do it!”
Without enthusiasm, if the team goes into it,
the thing will not succeed.
So you still have to
even if you’ve seen it beforehand,
you still have to make
give time for people to… make their own discoveries,
arrive at it, do a little bit of, you know, trial and error and everything
though you know what to do. Because that’s important
because if the team doesn’t engage like they are discovering something
and doing something and making something new happen
you know it all,
you won’t have a vibrant team.
There are some points, where there are chasms that you have to cross.
There you don’t
Yesterday, Dilip was saying he does the military style of function.
When there are deep chasms to cross, you take on as a military commander
and just tell them, “Shut up and cross”
because there if you allow everybody’s opinion and ideas to happen,
most probably you will go in.
So, this is subtle (Laughs),
you know I am sure every business person is doing this.
There are times when you are letting the teams lead you
and there are times when you take charge of everything
and force it across certain points.
Shekhar Kapur: Many spiritual leaders are working towards creating a peaceful world
bringing down violence.
What steps have you taken in that direction?
Do you think you can impact the leaders of the warring nations
and bring about peace using your spiritual teachings or methods?
Sadhguru: See, there are conflicts
which have been hanging upon the planet for decades for the same reasons.
Different types of conflicts have happened.
The spiritual leaders or spiritual process
essentially focus on… focuses on
bringing peacefulness and blissfulness to an individual human being.
So when I say an individual human being,
it does not matter who he is,
whether he is a leader of a nation
or a business leader
or a… just a man on the street
or whatever it is,
it works for every human being.
So definitely spiritual process has to touch everybody,
particularly people who are in positions of responsibility and power
because they can make a huge difference
for lots of people because they
When you’re a leader
When you’re a leader of a nation or even these days large businesses,
every thought,
every emotion,
every action that you generate is impacting millions of people.
Just the very thought that you generate is impacting people
in so many different ways.
When such a responsibility has been placed in your hands
it's extremely important the leaders of nations,
large business corporations,
they must take these steps to ensure
as to how they are within themselves,
what kind of beings are they.
Some work has to be done upon themselves
because every thought and emotion that they generate is impacting millions of people.
When such a privilege has been given to you,
if you just think something is going to happen to million people,
it's extremely important that you conduct this privilege in a responsible manner,
and you can only conduct this responsibly
if there is a spiritual process within you.
When I say a spiritual process,
maybe not everybody understands what I’m
you know, what it means.
So one way of putting it is,
there is a certain sense of inclusiveness
that you’re not an exclusive entity,
you are an inclusive process
and this inclusiveness if it does not arise
and you have the
you have a certain level of power in your hands,
then definitely it will lead to various kinds of conflicts;
there’s no question about that.
So, we have worked with millions of people,
we have worked in the prisons in… you know,
it's mandatory now in all the central prisons in South India
and there are various other things we are doing
to make this happen.
Definitely we have also tried to work with very major leaders;
particularly I have focused upon the business leaders
because 100 years ago if you looked at this world,
military leadership was the most powerful leadership.
In the last 100 years
it has evolved into a situation where
democratically elected leaders,
political leaders, are the most powerful people,
but that is going to change.
That’s already beginning to change and
it's going to change very rapidly in the next 10 to 15 years.
You will see in the future
the economic leaders are going to be the most important people.
Seeing this,
I have started working with economic leaders individually on certain levels
and we have definitely made a difference
in the way they make their decisions,
the way they conduct their businesses
this is being done,
but this is being done very discreetly
because it is not something that needs to be handled in public.

(Sadhguru): This human system in yoga we look at it as five sheaths or five layers,
five layers of body.
In the yogic system there is no such thing as mind.
There is no such thing as anything.
Everything is seen as body
because we are looking at it as a technology for transformation.
These are called
Annamayakosha,
manomayakosha,
pranamayakosha,
vigyanamayakosha
and anandhamayakosha.
Anna means the food that you have eaten
what you call as my body
is just the food that you have eaten. Isn’t it?
It’s a heap of food,
small or big is your choice.
but it’s a heap of food whichever way, isn’t it?
As there is a physical body
which you gathered from outside
there is a mental body.
When we say mind it is not here or there.
Every cell in the body has it’s own intelligence.
Every cell in the body has it’s own memory, isn’t it?
So there is a body of mind
so this is known as mental body or manomayakosha.
So that is hardware;
this is software.
This hardware and software cannot do much
unless you plug it into quality power.
So the third layer of the body is called pranamayakosha or the energy body.
These three are physical in nature.
The next layer of the body is a transitory body
which is known as vigyanamayakosha.
It is a transitory body
from physical to non-physical
it is transiting.
It does not ascribe to any of the physical qualities
but at the same time
it has not become completely non-physical either.
The fifth one is called as anandhamayakosha.
In English language
it translates into as bliss body.
Bliss body does not mean
there is a bubble of bliss inside you.
We are calling it bliss body
because in our experience
whenever we touch it we become blissful.
So we are calling it bliss body
that’s not it’s nature.
That’s what it causes for us.
It is a non-physical dimension
which is the source of everything that is physical.
If you align the physical body,
the mental body
and the energy body
in proper alignment and balance
there will be no physical or psychological ailments within you.
It is just a dis-aligned state
which causes all kinds of problems.
When body comes to a certain ease there is no disease.
So if you align these three things
only then you have a passage,
you have a possibility of touching the anandhamayakosha
where blissfulness becomes a natural process.
It is not that you are blissful about something;
you are just blissful
because that is the nature of life.
To create health for yourself
there are three fundamentals that you need to take care of
food, activity and rest.
When it comes to food
one of the most important things you must be conscious of is
on a certain day when you eat a certain type of food whatever you eat
you must consciously notice
how quickly does it digest and become a part of yourself.
Any food that you eat,
if it lasts over three hours
that means you have eaten bad food
and that is something either to be avoided
or reduced in quantity.
If food moves out of your stomach bag within three hours
this means you are eating something
that your system can handle efficiently
it may not be the best food
but your system is able to handle it
and between one meal and the next meal
if you create a clear gap of five to six hours
and in between there is no other ingestion
you will see
the cleansing process in the system on the cellular level
cleansing will happen
and this cleansing on cellular level is most important and significant
for a healthful life.
So between meals there must be at least five to six hours of space.
If you are over thirty years of age
two meals a day,
two good meals a day will suffice.
One in the morning and one in the evening.
After the evening meal
before you go to bed
there must be a minimum of three hours
and if there is a certain amount of physical activity
not necessarily very heavy or strenuous activity –
just simple walking
or may be a dance
or something like this
create something for yourself
where about at least twenty to thirty minutes
there is some physical activity
after the evening meal.
If you do this,
largely your system will be healthy.
If one goes to bed with food still inside the stomach bag
a certain level of inertia is generated in the system
this inertia physiologically it’s like accelerating towards death.
Death is ultimate inertia
and if you go to bed with stomach full
one thing is it generates inertia;
another dimension is the stomach bag is full means
it will create pressure on other organs in the abdomen region –
this will also lead to various kinds of health issues.
It’s very important when you go to bed again food is moved out of stomach bag
that the bag is not heavy to put pressure on –
as you sleep in different postures
it should not be putting pressure on the rest of the organs.
When it comes to activity
in this brief time I don’t want to give you an exercise regimen.
The simple thing that we need to understand is
our body is capable of bending forward,
bending backward
and twisting sideways on either side.
This much activity must happen
whatever you do in whatever form.
If you do classical hatha yoga that is the best way to do it.
Scientific way of doing it.
If that is not yet in your life
you must somehow make sure everyday
you bend forward, backward and twist both ways and squat
so that stretching of the spinal column will happen.
This much activity is a must for everybody on a daily basis
if we want to keep the entire system in a healthful state
particularly your neurological system
which will be an issue as one ages.
The volume of rest that an individual needs is determined by various factors.
One important factor is
the type and the volume of food that one consumes;
when I say the type of food
you must experiment with foods and see
what types of foods cause maximum heaviness within you.
What type of foods will leave you like an agile
if you make sure
at least forty percent of your diet is fresh vegetables and fruits
you will see the lightness in the body will come
because what the body needs is restfulness
not necessarily sleep.
Most people understand that
sleep is only way to rest.
No,
as you sit and stand you can either be restful
or in a state of agitation
or in a state of inertia.
If you are in a lively state of restfulness,
moment to moment in your life
the volume of sleep you actually require will come down.
The lubricating fluids in your joints turn to settle down
and are not in circulation.
So when you wake up
body is demanding you first lubricate your joints
directional movement is a simple way of doing this.
Sadhguru: When a human being is born,
a certain software is set within himself
which is a combination of
time, energy and the information
that he carries with him.
These three together
will determine various aspects of life.
These three together will even determine
how long a human being lives and how he lives.
So if this is so,
is it all predetermined?
The information is definitely predetermined.
This does not mean you cannot take in new information.
It is just that
it kind of pushes you or pulls you
towards certain type of things
depending upon what kind of information you have,
but this does not stop you
from taking in fresh information today, this moment.
Energy is allotted for different aspects of life.
This information that we were talking about,
the whole heap of information
is referred to as Sanchitha
or Sanchitha karma.
The allotted information
which must be handled
which is more urgent,
express and a little more compulsive
than the rest of it
This information that you have is from elsewhere,
what life has gathered,
the energy allotted within the system,
allots according to the nature of the information.
If your information
or the karmic information
is leaning towards or veering towards
let’s say, for example - physicality,
you will see the energies naturally allot themselves
into the physical structure of who you are.
If the information is leaning towards
your intellectual process,
accordingly the energy allots itself to that activity.
If the information is very emotional,
energy allots itself to that dimension.
If it is inclining towards a spiritual dimension,
then energy allots itself in that direction.
This allotment is happening by natural tendencies,
but this does not mean
one cannot reallocate.
One can reallocate
but if you simply go by your tendencies,
yes, life is predetermined.
If you are 100% a slave of your tendencies,
life is predetermined,
very easily we can predict what will happen.
Reallocation of energy,
how we manage our energies,
in which direction we focus energies,
do we enhance it or do we deplete it
these things are very much in our hands,
but the third dimension
which is an important composite of one’s life
is the time.
Time,
ticking away all the time.
You can’t slow it down,
you can’t hasten it,
you can conserve your energy,
you can throw your energy around,
you can develop it,
you can make it phenomenally big or insipid,
but time
going away.
So this time has its own intelligence
and it flows according to certain parameters of
karmic information
and the energy allotment that’s available in one’s system.
So can’t we do anything about it?
We can,
but that is a much more elusive dimension of life
than the other two.
The other two are much easier to manage
and manifest in one’s life.
Generating energy and using it the way you want,
not allowing your tendencies
to determine the nature of your thought and emotion and activity,
is much much easier
than taking charge of time.
Even the Adi Yogi took charge of time
only when he was in certain states.
When he was in such states
we refer to him as Kala Bhairava,
that he took charge of time.
Time determines the nature or the duration of
one's life and death.
Both life and death are within the ambit of time.
So time,
one who has mastery over time
has mastery over life and death.
One who has mastery over his energies,
has absolute mastery over his life
but not over his death.
One who has mastery over his information,
or one who has mastery over the tendencies
which are caused by the information,
or one who is free from the tendencies
which are caused by the type of karmic information you carry
has mastery over the quality of his life,
that whether this is pleasant or unpleasant.
One who has mastery over his energies will determine
the nature of his activity and how he lives.
One who has mastery over time will determine the nature of his life and death,
and he can determine whether he wants to live or die.
So these three components together
is the making of life.
These three components together
is what you are right now.
The accumulation of body,
the accumulation of information
is essentially determined by these aspects.
Depending upon what type of karmic information you have,
you tend to go towards a certain type of information,
certain type of activity.
Depending upon how your energy is allotted
you naturally tend to choose certain type of activity.
so they were asking me,
‘Sadhguru, our activity, isn’t it a barrier?
If we give up activity,
won’t we be progressing spiritually faster?’
If you can give up all levels of activity
yes, for sure.
Giving up activity,
all levels of activity
includes food and going to the toilet
and what happens in your mind.
Nishkarma is the best karma.
That means no activity.
Everything is at standstill.
You just don’t do work,
that’s not nice karma,
that’s bumming around.
That’s bad karma.
if you can simply close your eyes and sit here
for days on end,
That means you’re doing something good to this being.
You stopped everything and just sit here
that means you’re doing something absolutely wonderful to this being.
Then we are fine with you.
If you’re doing something great to yourself,
we’re fine with you.
If you can’t do that,
you must be doing something useful to ten people around you.
If you can’t do that also,
then you must just learn to listen
to what other people say.
Either you must be useful to yourself
or to a few people around you.
If you can’t do both, what’s the point of living?
I’m asking.
So you cannot do absolutely this and absolutely that,
so little bit of closing the eyes,
little bit of activity
‘Not little, Sadhguru - whole day!’
That’s what I call as little.
Twenty-four - is it such a great number?
Is twenty-four a very big number?
Even this little child knows what is twenty-four.
Yes. See. See.
Even this little baby knows what is twenty-four.
All twenty-four hours
either it must be invested in sadhana or in work.
‘What about my sleep?’
That should also become sadhana
and that should also become a tool for work.
Rest is the basis of activity.
Do you understand?
Rest has no purpose by itself.
If you only want to rest, you must rest in peace.
If you want to practice only rest,
then we will bury you - you can practice rest.
Rest is used only as a basis of
All activity is based in restfulness.
So we want you to be in a restful condition,
so that you could be active.
So sleeping and waking up is just management of energies,
that’s all.
Time you cannot manage, its rolling.
If you sit it’s rolling,
if you stand it’s rolling,
if you sleep it’s rolling.
You can’t stop it,
but sleep and activity is a way of managing our energies,
and a way of coming back with new force tomorrow morning.
As you go, go, go you’re like a battery cell slowly
So you charge it up and again come back.
The idea of charging the battery is to put it to use again, isn't it?
Nobody charges a battery just for the sake of charging a battery.
You charge a battery because you want to use it.
So, if one,
not intellectually understands,
if one grasps these three dimensions within yourself,
that you are a combination of
time, energies and information,
if you can conduct these three things,
if you can conduct all these three things effectively,
then you’re free in every way,
in every way.
That’s liberation.
That’s mukti.
If you can conduct all these three things consciously,
you’re 100% free.
If you just conduct your information consciously
and you can manage it well,
you’re 33% free,
you still don’t have passing mark.
If you manage your energies well and also information well,
you’re 66%,
all right, you’re doing okay,
but if you manage all the three
then you’re free.
There are two fundamental aspects or forces
acting within every human being.
One is the force of self-preservation.
The instinct of self-preservation
is constantly striving
to build walls of protection around yourself,
and the longing to become boundless
is constantly striving to push you beyond the boundaries
in which you exist.
It is these two which are finding
variety of expression
either in the form of accumulation
or in the form of every kind of desire
that one can throw up is
essentially the play of these two forces.
Once you make the mistake of identifying yourself
with something limited,
the instinct of self-preservation wins hands down,
to a point
it almost makes it looks like the other force doesn't even exist.
So the essence of working towards
success in one’s sadhana is
all sadhana is essentially aimed towards
expanding the limitations,
breaking the boundaries of one's energy.
When your energies are longing to become boundless,
in your thought and emotion
if you’re identified with limited things around you,
then you will create an unnecessary tussle
between the two forces.
The secret of success is
that these two should become one.
Unless these two things become one,
you do not have enough energy
to break the limitations of the present dimension,
to break the boundaries of present dimension
because now whatever you have is split;
it is trying to tug you in two different directions
It will become a journey of one step forward, one step backward,
one step forward, one step backward.
If you are doing one step forward, one step backward,
it’s very clear you are not intending to go anywhere.
Maybe it’s good exercise,
But you are not intending to go anywhere.
Once you’re identified with the limitations of your own body,
what you refer to as extended body
extensions of your body are family, house
it’s not you should not have them.
Having a body and being identified with is different.
Similarly, having a family and being identified with it is very different.
Once you’re identified with it,
naturally your whole system work towards
building a wall around this identity,
not allowing one to expand or to break the barriers of who he is right now.
Shankara laments
‘Kaate Kaanta Dhanagat Chinta,’
which means once you’re identified
with your family relationships,
you can only naturally think of money
and property and this and that,
you cannot think of anything else.
Don’t give yourself the thing,
‘Oh yes, I have become like this only because of my family.’
No,
you have not become like this
because of your family.
Because you are like this,
your family has become like that.
Don’t get it the other way round.
It is the way you identify yourself with it
that certain things are happening.
Nothing outside of us is a barrier.
It is the way we hold it,
the way we carry the outside within ourselves is the barrier.
If your energies are split
one trying to build walls,
another trying to break walls
it is a tussle,
it a wasteful way of living.
If you dedicate everything to building walls,
at least you may build a great wall of India.
I'm sorry,
the Chinese have the greatest wall I think;
Or if you put all your energies towards breaking boundaries,
that will definitely happen.
There are old barriers,
walls which were built elsewhere,
which may take a little bit of time to break,
but the important thing is that you are not building new walls.
Old walls can be made to crumble,
but the problem is the new walls that are coming up every day.
This is not something that you have to do consciously.
Once you have a limited identity,
everything in you builds walls,
there is no other way.
So sadhana is pushing you in one way,
if your mind is pegged down to limited things
you are unnecessarily creating a tension in the system.
So it’s very important
it’s like you tied up your boat and you are rowing it hard
good exercise again,
but you are not going anywhere.
If you untie the rope,
even if you do not row,
slowly with the pace of the river at least you will go.
Spiritual journey need not be effort-ful,
it just needs to be sensible,
but to come to sense
it may take effort sometimes;
need not, but it may.
(Sadhguru): You know, in the world,
we are building medical infrastructure in such a way that today,
all of us are expecting some day we will all be seriously ill.
It need not be so (Laughs).
If you live with Narmadaji (Referring to the river Narmada) it need not be so (Laughs).
And not just her, there’re many others.
It need not be so if you know how to manage the elements.
If not all of them,
it’s very easy to bring water and air into your control.
These are the two elements, which are easily accessible.
If you do this combination well
and little conscious about what you consume,
you will never go to the doctor.
There was a time,
for the whole town there used to be one doctor and it was enough.
Today, every street has five doctors and it’s not enough.
This shows how we are living.
When we forget how to live,
when we do not respect what makes our life –
the earth… that we walk upon,
air that we breathe,
water that we drink,
the very sky that holds us in place –
when we have no respect and reverence for that,
how they behave within us is very different.
Today, there is substantial scientific evidence to show
that water has tremendous memory.
If you just generate a thought looking at the water,
the molecular structure of the water will change.
Just a look –
the molecular structure of the water will change.
If you touch it, it will change.
How you touch it is very important.
So, now for example,
they’re keeping it in a copper vessel
with a flower on top of it
because this is the god.
What other god?
If you don’t drink water for one wa… one day,
this is the only god, no other god (Laughs), isn’t it?
So how you treat the water,
the memory remains for a long period.
So before we consume it
or before it touches our body,
how we treat the water changes the quality of everything in our system.
This is a science we’ve always known
but today, modern science has done enormous amount of experimentation on this.
Now they’re saying water is a liquid computer.
The volume of memory and intelligence this carries by itself,
it is a liquid computer.
This is what they’re saying, it’s a fluid computer.
We’ve always known this.
What is called as theerth,
why for one drop of water people go and stand in a temple is
because it has the memory of the divine.
You want to take that into your system.
If the deity is powerful
and the water has touched the deity,
it has the memory of the divine,
you want that to enter your system.
But being in a pure space like this, it’s a blessing.
If with
There are certain ways with which you can be in the water.
If one does that,
every ailment,
all chronic ailments will go.
There are infectious diseases and chronic ailments.
Infectious diseases are an invasion from outside,
other organisms are entering our body and troubling us –
for this, you need a doctor.
You need warfare,
you have to bomb them out,
chemical warfare is normally what we’re doing.
But over seventy percent of human ailments are self-help.
We manufacture that within our system.
This is simply because
fundamentally, the way we are treating the elements within ourselves and around ourselves.
The so-called modern life has absolutely no reverence to the substances
which make our life.
The life-making material is being treated badly
and we are expecting it’ll behave well within us and it will not.
So, being here at Narmada,
it’s time we bring back this culture because
it’s gone a full circle.
Now modern science is insisting that water,
the way you treat it is the way it’s going to behave within you.
And we must learn to treat it well.
If we want to be healthy,
if we want to be well,
if we want to be successful,
if we want to be prosperous –
for all these things it’s important,
the elements within you cooperate.
If they don’t cooperate, nothing will work.
One simple thing you could do is how to treat the water
atleast the water that you consume
I know today everybody is drinking water from plastic bottles
if you keep it in a metal vessel particularly copper or copper alloy
the very nature of the water will change
and traditionally I don't know if it still maintained in this part of the country
but in southern india even now it's pretty common in traditional homes
where everyday there is a pooja for the water vessel
they will put some vibhuthi on it
some kumkum on it
and a small arathi for the thing because
the water should
the water has a enormous amount of memory
it remembers how you treat it and accordingly it will behave.
This is something very simple everybody can start
and as a part of this,
in Tamilnadu we have been encouraging people to use copper vessels
pure copper vessels because copper is such a
you know it is the best conducting metal and it energizes the water
energizing if you check the chemical composition it will not change.
that is the beauty of it.
it is only the molecular strucuture of water that will change
you might have experienced this suppose you ever
is there a waterfall in Narmada anywhere?
There is a waterfall
if the water is falling like let us say over twenty, twenty five feet
and just after the waterfall if you just touch the water you will find
water is silky for touch, have you noticed this?
Because water implodes within itself and the molecular structure changes
the way it feels is different.
Today they have created what is called as water imploding machines
you can implode the water with a machine
it just churns it in a certain way
it implodes it
it has been found that if you use water imploding machines
with ten percent of water you can grow the plants the same way as you are growing
the water consumption will come down
with ten percent of water the plants will yield the same
because the imploded water becomes silky
and it's abilitiy to become a part of the plant system or tree is much much better.
So if you are in agriculture imploding machines can come
its some people have patented it in UK
We are trying to bring some machines
and give the service to the local farmers in Tamilnadu so that
people can use imploded water
and their water consumption in the field will come down dramatically
because how long you pump the water
electiricity not being free these days
it gets very expensive for the farmers
if the amount of water he needs to pump on his field is much less
it will make a very difference.
For daily consumption just a copper vessel
everyday if you have something
if you light a lamp next to it
if necessary there is one flower
the very way the water behaves within you will change
and when before you consume just one
one moment of gratitude and reverence
because this is the material with which you are making your life.
Not with some unknown god
This is the material that makes your life every moment
and how you treat is very important
in your emotion
in your thought
if you hold water as
if you... you don't even have to think Devi stuff
you just understand the reality the fact that it is
without it we cannot survive.
Yes?
Whatever is the basis of your survival, you bow down isn't it?
So the water, the food...
just...
bringing that reverence
you will see the volume that you consume will also come down
and the way it behaves within you will come down.
If you don't catch an infection
if you treat these elements properly
as I said earlier most probably you won't see a doctor's face
unless you are one
Barkha Dutt: How do we keep faith, which you say is new to us,
separate from politics?
You have… You have, in the past for example,
I remember when Anna Hazare was lodging his anti-corruption movement, you did come and applaud it
but you said that the Lokpal was not some magic wand,
I remember you saying that.
Do you believe that we are seeing a dangerous cocktail of
faith and politics getting more and more mixed up?
Sadhguru: See, it is happening,
I’m not saying no
but it’s much less than ever before.
Barkha Dutt: Really?
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: It seems to be much more than ever before.
Sadhguru: No, that’s because of you (Laughter/Applause).
That’s because
That’s because if… if ten people get beheaded in some remote part of Iraq,
you make sure the blood spills into my sitting room,
because of that.
Otherwise, you’re sitting here now,
today
Let’s say 1,000 years ago, we were sitting here,
1,000 people got killed in Iraq,
we will sit here peacefully thinking world is going really great, (Barkha Dutt laughs)
spring-time (Laughter),
everything is nice.
So, this is because the dissemination of information,
if ten people get killed somewhere, it’s a huge thing
because it comes into our sitting rooms, bedrooms, dining room,
everywhere there is a television,
so it pours into our homes,
so it is happening.
So, this is good because even a small thing looks magnified now in people’s experience
but this has been happening always.
It’s happening at its lowest level now.
Here and there it spurts up, which needs to be controlled for sure.
But what I see is,
for the first time,
for the very first time in the history of humanity,
even if you
the numbers are not qualified because the population has increased,
even in terms of percentages of people,
how many people can think for themselves today is huge
compared to what it was a hundred years ago or five hundred years ago
or 1,000 years ago or 10,000 years ago.
All these centuries, there would be one man in the village who thinks for you,
who reads for you,
who writes for you.
You just have to do what you have to do, simple things.
Today, everybody is able to think for himself or herself.
Now, human intellect is blossoming.
I do not say it is blossoming in the right direction,
with the right sense,
no,
insanely it is blossoming.
It doesn’t matter,
insanity will happen for some time,
people will come to their senses.
When something is new they’ll go crazy,
after some time they’ll come to senses.
Once human intellect blossoms sufficiently on the planet,
then this looking upward for well-being will not make sense, believe me.
Right now, from looking upward,
slowly the world is tilting for
In pursuit of human well-being, people were looking heavenward,
still many are, that’s different,
but a whole lot of people have started looking outward.
So if you look heavenward, hallucinations will happen,
wars will happen
because my heaven and your heaven different, you know?
None of the heavens have anything for women, you better know that (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: I am definitely going to hell (Laughs). Anyway
Sadhguru: So you believe in heaven and hell (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: I was being facetious,
I was being facetious.
Sadhguru: Let me finish this.
Barkha Dutt: I was being facetious.
I don’t know if there is somebody up there.
Sadhguru: That’s fine, that is fine. I
Barkha Dutt: Is it a force, is it energy, is that inside me?
Sadhguru: No, I’m saying this
This thing about looking heavenward is slowly going away
and in pursuit of well-being,
people are looking outward.
This is ripping the planet apart.
Human pursuit of well-being is just destroying the planet.
Now, the fundamentals of what we are transmitting
The fundamentals of this culture,
which is essentially rooted in the yogic culture,
what you call as Indian culture or Hindu culture
is essentially a pure yogic science.
In the form of culture, it finds many colors and distortions,
which is what you’re seeing as the Hindu culture or Indian culture,
whatever you want to call it.
Barkha Dutt: But they’re not interchangeable terms.
Sadhguru: Why?
Barkha Dutt: Because we’re (Sadhguru laughs) a multi-religious country with many different cultures.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) We have….
I want you to (Laughs)
I want you to understand the word Hindu does not signify a religion.
You ask them do they worship one god if they are Hindus.
In the same family, they’re worshipping twenty-five gods (Laughter).
They don’t… They don’t know which is the god,
so they’re making sure worship everything (Laughter).
Just in case something will hit, okay (Laughter/Applause).
Now, the word Hindu means the land between Himalayas and Indusagara.
This land, this subcontinent is Hindu.
All people who are born here are considered Hindu
because it’s a geographical identity.
I know there’s a whole political issue,
if I speak like this, they say, “Oh! He’s Hindu.”
Barkha Dutt: No, I mean people will tell you you’re echoing the RSS (Referring to a political party) chief (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: I don’t know what he said, I have not
Barkha Dutt: He said all Indians are Hindus and there was a huge
Sadhguru: Okay, I am not
Barkha Dutt: …political outcry over that.
Sadhguru: Okay, all Indians live between Himalayas and Indian Ocean (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: That’s okay.
Sadhguru: Those who want to jump into the ocean
Barkha Dutt: That’s okay (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: If you live
See, this is a dialectical culture,
it expresses things in a certain way.
Between Himalayas and Indian Ocean if you live, you are a Hindu.
If you jump into the ocean and cross, you are a Lanka, okay (Laughter/Applause)?
So, I don’t know what is the struggle about this.
This is because there is such a narrow understanding of this.
This is the debate which we have to change in the country
because somebody has absolute belief systems,
we are trying to compare that to a culture
where there is no such thing as belief.
We have not ever been believers,
we’ve always been seekers.
This is a land where the highest value has never been God,
always liberation,
mukti
freedom is the highest goal.
God has never been the highest goal (Applause).
So you
you put this in the same box as something,
which just believes this is it or you’re dead
unfortunate,
that’s not the way to look at it.
This is what we have to bring back.
If we really value human freedom,
you must bring back this seeking for liberation.
“I want to be free, not just from others but from myself and my god and my heaven and everything”
because God has never been the goal in this culture,
God is just another tool.
When I use the word tool for a god,
people get very hurt.
They say, “Sadhguru, don’t say that, it hurts us.”
I say, “That’s okay, you come to the ashram,
I’ll give you some plumbing job (Laughter), all right?”
See
Barkha Dutt: That’ll hurt more (Laughs).
Sadhguru: No, no, no. “No spanner, no winch, nothing.
Use your fingers, nails, teeth, whatever.
Three days later, nails will be gone, half the teeth will be gone.
Then I will give you a spanner.
Will you worship the spanner or no” (Laughter/Applause)?
We are who we are
As
as human beings, we are who we are
only because of our ability to use a tool.
Otherwise you are not even good as a dog.
You can’t even fight a dog, isn’t it?
Barkha Dutt: So you’re against organized religion?
Quite clearly,
if god is just a tool and faith is not the same as spirituality
Sadhguru: (Overlapping conversation) No, I… See… No, no, I’m not
I’m not saying I’m against this or that.
All I’m saying is I want human beings to come to this much -
if you know something you know it,
if you don’t know something you don’t know it.
Everything that you do not know you believe –
this is a dangerous thing.
Now, the fight on the planet is not between good and evil,
this and that,
no -
one man’s versus another man’s belief.
I’m saying why the hell do you believe anything?
Because you’re essentially not straight enough to admit,
“I really don’t know.”
“I don’t know” people can’t fight.
I don’t know, you don’t know – can we fight?
“I know” is a fight.
“I do not know” is never a fight,
“I do not know” is a way of seeking.
If we do not establish this seeking in every human being,
that every human being is longing to know
whether outside or inside, whatever,
you are
Because this is the nature of human intelligence,
it can’t sit quiet.
It can only sit quiet if you freeze it with belief system.
If you seal it with belief system, it can sit quiet.
Otherwise the very nature of this intelligence is it wants to know.
(Sadhguru): This night,
let it not be just one night of exuberance,
let this in some way work as a turning point
for you to move towards your own awakening.
This is a fantastic step that you’ve taken.
Whoever we may be
however intelligent we are,
however competent we are,
however capable or strong we are
without an element of Grace in our lives, there’ll be no success.
A genuine success will happen only when there is Grace,
otherwise you have all the parts
but no lubrication and that machine is not going to successfully function.
We do not know what you can do and cannot do in your life,
whether you’re going to become the richest man in the world
or the most beautiful woman on the planet
or (Laughs)...
or you’re going to climb Mount Everest
or you’re going to meet
beat Mr. Bolt (Referring to runner Usain Bolt) in a hundred meter race,
I don’t know about these things
but every one of you can strive to become a wonderful human being
and nobody can deny that to you (Applause).
So I want you to do a simple process as a part of this Mahashivaratri.
Write down three things
write down three things when you go home,
whatever you think makes a human being into a wonderful human being,
just three things and make it a reality in your life.
What you think is the highest
don’t do what I want - please do what you want.
In your life, if you do not do what you want,
it’ll become a wasted life.
You don’t have to do what somebody else wants
but three things that you think will make a human being into a truly wonderful human being
these three things, make it a reality.
Next year we’ll be here again (Applause).
Questioner: My name is Ananth.
My question is about marriage,
divorce.
I’m married
Sadhguru: No, no, they are two different things (Laughter &amp; Applause).
Questioner: …marriage
what I see today is
many youngsters like
many of them they don’t want to marry
and few of them who marry
there are occasions where they are getting divorced;
so would you like to throw some light on this situation Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: See, you need to understand the institution of marriage.
it’s about bringing a certain sanctity
to the simple basic needs that every human being has.
there are physical needs,
there are psychological needs,
there are economic needs,
emotional needs,
social needs,
variety of needs.
To fulfill all these things we set up an institution called marriage
where all these can be conducted in a sensible manner,
otherwise if we did it on the streets like every other creature
it would turn ugly for us.
And we will feel not good about it.
So,to bring some sense of organization,
some aesthetic,
some stability,
because man and woman coming together naturally brought fresh life.
it is...
compared to any other creature,
it is the most helpless life
which needs maximum amount of support.
You could leave a puppy on the street;
as long as he gets food, he grows up into a good dog,
no problem.
But not so with a human being;
he doesn’t need just physical support,
he needs variety of support and
above all the stable situation.
Whether there should be marriage in society or not
one will debate when they are eighteen
because physical body is asking for freedom,
all right.
At that time everybody questions –
is marriage really needed,
why can’t we just live whichever way we want?
But when you are three years of age
you valued marriage immensely,
a stable marriage immensely.
Isn’t it so?
Yes or no?
Juhi Chawla: Yes, yes.
again when you become forty-five, fifty you’re hundred percent for marriage
between and eighteen and thirty-five you’re questioning the whole process (Laughter &amp; Applause),
okay?
Juhi Chawla: That’s true (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Because where the physical body is dominant,
at that time if you give in to that
then it will question every institution.
this is hormone fired freedom okay (Laughter).
Your intelligence has been hijacked by hormones,
so you question the fundamentals of everything.
I’m not saying marriage is the thing
but do you have a better alternative?
If you have a better alternative, damn the marriage
but you have not come up with a better alternative
because a stable situation is a must for a child.
Once you have a child it’s a twenty year project (Laughter)
Your whims and fancies will change,
your emotions will change;
if that is what it is, don’t get into such situations.
It’s not compulsory for everybody to get married,
it’s good young
you were saying people are thinking whether to get married.
I’m glad it is not necessary for everybody
but if you get into it and if you
especially if you get into children you must understand,
it’s a minimum twenty year project
whether you like it or you don’t like it.
Otherwise you shouldn’t get into those projects,
you don’t walk into a project, drop it half way and walk away, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
It’s your choice
but at least choose consciously.
You don’t have to get married because everybody is getting married,
you don’t have to talk about marriage and divorce in same breath
as if they come together (Laughter).
This is a completely an American idea,
you’re thinking of marriage and divorce together
nobody thought of divorce in this country till recently, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: So, if it happens,
if something happens
something truly went wrong between two people
and they have to separate that will any way inevitably happen.
You don’t have to plan it at the time of wedding (Laughter).
why should you ever talk about marriage and divorce in one breath?
It's a crime
(Sadhguru): Success and failure is not in the volumes of money flowing into your life;
success and failure is not dependent upon
the recognition that you’re finding in the world;
you are successful with life
if you know how to walk with joy through hell.
Meltdown is not hell; don’t
I know there is a certain amount of global warming involved
but it's not as hot as hell, not yet.
It's not bad at all;
it's very good.
I’m sure you can do with less food,
smaller house,
smaller car
or walking is great, you know.
Hum?
Walking is very good for health, do you know?
Some man who just became 100 years old in Coimbatore city,
I have not met the man;
I read in the newspaper just a month ago;
he became… he, his 100th…100th birthday,
they asked him,
‘what is the source of your health and well-being’
because he is still strong and good.
He said, ‘I’m a walk-king.’ You know,
he put a hyphen in walking and said, ‘I’m a walk-king.
Because everyday I walk;
100, I am still walking.’
So your failure could be extremely good for your well-being.
Don’t be against your own well-being.
You know Sathumavu ganji and walking
sure recipe for health.
There is no such thing as failure.
Failure is an idea
because success is also a stupid idea.
It’s your idea what is success and what is failure, isn't it?
Instead of trying to change the world change your idea.
Isn't it easier?
If you just change your idea of success and failure
everything is great, isn't it?
If you were a beggar on the street,
today if you could walk into the restaurant,
eat a masala dosa and pay 10 rupees bill,
this would be the height,
the peak of your success.
Isn't it so?
So you’ve gotten trapped in social situations
and it is not even your idea;
why am I crediting you with this?
It is somebody’s idea
of what is success, isn't it?
Don’t become a slave to somebody’s idea;
at least have your own idea.
Hum?
You have no idea of your own;
don’t deceive yourself.
Every idea,
every thought,
every emotion,
every value that you have is picked up from somewhere
and it rules you from within;
it rules you from within.
Your religion,
your society,
your culture has trained you to believe that this is it.
So first… the first and foremost success is
that you are not a slave to anybody’s idea.
This is success.
Whatever the situation of life,
you are alive means you are successful, isn't it?
No?
Participants: Yes… Yes… Hmmm.
Sadhguru: Let me see if you are successful.
Participant: Hmmm.
Sadhguru: Hum? This is success; you are alive.
You don't know the value of life.
You are crying about the share market;
you do not know the value of life.
Because the damn graph is going up and down
you want to die?
‘No, no but I lost so much money.’
There is no such thing;
these are all social things.
These are not existential things.
We created the society for our well-being,
not to take our lives.
Yes?
You created your family,
your social structure and every other damn thing
for your well-being,
not to take your life, isn't it?
Now every damn thing can take your life.
Don’t make things that you create
things that human beings create larger than your life;
that is the basis of your suffering.
(Sadhguru): So he said swa-dharma
swa means self,
dharma means law
so the law of yourself,
he is talking about the law of the self.
What is the nature of the self,
how does it operate,
what is it that you have to do with it?
As there is law of the physical
there is law of the self.
He is saying ‘you must live by the laws of the self,
not by the physical laws.’
If you live by the physical laws this will happen
today we are friends,
tomorrow
something comes we’ll be fighting.
Yes or no?
Yes?
You are sitting there,
I am sitting here,
we are nice.
If you try to sit here
there’ll be a fight.
Yes or no?
isn’t this happening even in the closest of relationships on the planet,
not just between two nations,
not between communities,
not between societies,
is it not between
happening between husband and wife,
father and child,
mother and child
is it not happening?
Yes or no?
Because this is the physical law
that you sit there, I sit here;
once in a way I come there, will do this. (Gestures)
If we feel like it we will hug
but if I sit on your head
or if I sit…you sit on my head,
it's not going to work.
Yes or no?
Now repeatedly one fly will come and sit here.
Initially
initially it just sat here. (Gestures)
after some time it started biting.
Then chukk. (Gestures)
Yes or no?
You may not get it that’s different (Laughs)
but you want to get it, isn't it?
So this is the nature of the physical.
So Krishna is saying
‘if you go by the physical laws
Arjuna is lamenting ‘how can I kill my brother,
how can I kill my grandfather,
how can I kill my Guru in this battle’
because they are on the other side.
So Krishna is saying
‘see if you go by the physical laws
you have to kill.
They stayed away,
you stayed away no problem.
Now we crossed our paths,
no
no chance of escaping this.
Today or tomorrow you will have to kill.
So the moment has come to kill.
You can't stop it;
this is not your choice or their choice,
this is the way of the physical.
Physical happens with boundaries.
If transgression of boundaries happen… (Gestures)
Yes or no?
For everybody
for everybody in this world you have a boundary.
Yes?
Your enemy means the boundary is there (Gestures)
if he crosses that there’ll be trouble.
Your neighbor means boundary is there,
if he crosses that there’ll be trouble.
Your friend means the boundary is here,
if he crosses that there’ll be trouble.
Your spouse means the boundary is here
but if he crosses that there’ll be trouble.
Your child means the boundary is here
but if he crosses that there’ll be trouble.
Yes or no?
So for everybody there is a boundary.
Isn't it so?
However dear to you they are
isn’t there a boundary?
Is there a boundary or no?
There is a boundary, isn't it?
Only if we maintain the boundary,
see there is low line (Laughs),
if you maintain the boundary
things work in the physical world.
If you cross the boundary
any transgression happens with the boundary,
beginning of violence is started, isn't it?
First step towards violence has begun;
initially it’ll happen in words,
then little pushing and then chopping.
Don’t think
‘no, no I won't do it.’
You will also do it.
This is the way of the physical.
So Krishna is saying
‘If you don’t want this,
if you’re struggling with this chopping business,
you follow your swadharma,
the way of the self
where there are no boundaries.’
You can sit here and be anywhere;
you can sit here and be nowhere.
Nobody is a transgression in this.
When you sit here
and there is no …you cannot transgress anybody
and nobody can transgress you;
if you experience this
then I don’t have to tell you fight the war.
But you live by the physical laws
and you try to avoid the fight
it is not going to help.
Anyway you have to fight.
So how to follow this?
You have to turn inward.
If you live by the way of the physical
collision is just one step away.
Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
Colliding with something is just a step away always.
You got to dodge it,
all the time dodging, isn't it?
If you don’t dodge you’ll go like this (Gestures)
with somebody invariably.
So that’s swadharma.
Sadhguru: Oh!
Sadhguru: Bearing a child
Please sit down
It is not that children are wrong.
We were all children some time ago.
It's not about children being right or wrong,
it's a stupid question,
it's not even a thought, okay, it's a silly thing
to think whether they're right or wrong.
It is just that
there was a time when a woman would easily have a dozen children in her lifetime.
Hmm?
And it was normal.
Three, four of them died; seven, eight of them lived, that was normal.
Now, most women who have children here probably have two;
some of them slipped through and they became three.
(Laughter)
Generally most women have
is there any
Are there lots of women –
leave the women who are over 50-60 years of age –
the younger women, is there anybody who has four, five children here?
Almost nil, isn't it?
But if you ask this question about 50 years ago,
almost any woman in the region of early 30s would have five children or six children.
So you… somewhere you got… got your sense in place,
you decided that instead of having six, let’s have two or one.
So if your sense can work to that extent,
right now we are in a place
where if we have to feed, clothe and offer a decent life for this seven billion people,
we need
For the standards that we’re thinking of,
for the standards that most people are aspiring for,
we need to outsource our resources
from at least another three Planet Earths.
We need at least three more planets.
We could do that;
it's just that they aren’t there.
If they were there, no problem, we could have gone and towed one planet close to us
and used that planet,
but there isn’t any other.
So till we find such one,
it's good to hold your reproduction, isn't it?
Till we find extra planets where we can export our people,
it's good to hold back your reproduction,
otherwise nobody’s going to live well on this planet.
It doesn’t matter what technology you bring,
it doesn’t matter what you do,
nobody’s going to live well on this planet
if you continue to increase.
When I say continue to increase,
I want you to understand the volume of increase that we have caused.
In the beginning of 20th century we were only 1.5 billion people on this planet.
In one century, in 110 years we are reaching towards seven billion people.
And we are technologically more capable than ever before.
What thousand men couldn’t do
could do,
today one man can do because of the machines and other things that we have.
Now United Nations predicts that by 2050 we’ll be 9.6 billion people.
At 9.6 billion people,
even if we live at
even if the earth is exploited at its present rate or much more,
each one of us have to live with 40% less resource than we are living right now.
When I say resource, don’t think of some fancy things
I'm talking about food, water, air
these resources you will have to live with 40% less,
that means nobody is going to live well.
Yes?
Just a few people who control a few things will be okay,
all others will suffer in an immense manner.
So just by individual fancy going on doing things,
humanity cannot afford it anymore.
It's time human beings function consciously,
that just coming to zero percent growth is not good enough,
we have to go into a minus,
instead of projecting by 2050 we’ll be 9.6,
why can’t we determine that by 2050 we’ll be 3.5 or four billion people?
So human being means doing everything consciously.
What is this compulsion about having a child?
One thing it is biological.
Biologically having a child is not a pleasant experience.
Let me tell you, if you don’t believe me,
ask somebody who’s delivered a child.
It is just the fulfillment of being involved with something.
It is the fulfillment of seeing something as a part of yourself.
If you are willing,
you can know this fulfillment with just about anything in your life.
If you're committed and involved with something in your life,
that fulfillment is very well taken care of.
This is not a campaign against children;
this is a campaign for the future children.
If future generations have to live well,
we have to conduct our lives consciously.
Conducting our life consciously,
one major part of it is right now,
because you can’t expand the planet,
you have to decrease the population,
there is no other way.
Either you do it or nature will do it.
When nature does it, it's not going to be nice;
it's not going to be nice at all.

Sadhguru chants Jananam Sukhadam
Sadhguru: Good evening everyone.
Vinita Bali: Good evening, namaskar and a very warm welcome to all of us here.
It is indeed an honor and a real privilege, Sadhguru,
to have you with us for the next ninety minutes,
during which time I shall do my best,
and we will explore I think a variety of concepts with Sadhguru
concepts around leadership, ethics, individual responsibility,
a little bit of questions around spirituality and so on.
So, without further ado,
I want to start off by asking you, Sadhguru,
what is the next step for Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Dinner.
Vinita Bali: Dinner (Laughter/Applause)?
I thought that was already over.
So, we expect a more profound answer from you (Laughter).
Sadhguru: It’s a very profound answer (Laughter)
because you can postpone many things in your life.
You can postpone buying a home, buying a car,
you can postpone your wedding if you want
it's a good thing (Laughter)
you can postpone your divorce,
good to postpone your death.
But you can’t postpone your dinner (Laughter).
Right now, this is the ugliness, which is happening in this country.
A whole lot of people are postponing their dinner today.
This is the horrible situation that’s happening.
So, do not consider dinner as not so profound, it’s very profound.
If you are eating ten times a day, it’s not profound.
If you are eating once or even twice a day,
it is quite profound (Laughs).
Vinita Bali: So, you say something which is, you know,
which is very close to my heart,
you talked about dinner. We
Sadhguru: No, no,
dinner is about my stomach, not my heart (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Okay. We’ll… we’ll get to the heart through your stomach (Laughter).
You know we live in a world of contrasts,
at least as I perceive it. You know,
there is obviously the rich and the poor,
there are the ones who are impoverished and the satiated.
You know, we live in a country where three hundred million people go to bed hungry every night.
How do we deal with these big social issues
and what is the one message that you would like to give to all of us,
where we as individuals can make our own little, big, whatever contribution
to being part of the solution,
rather than waiting for somebody else to do something?
Sadhguru: Now, you’re immediately getting into the missionary mode (Both laugh).
Vinita Bali: We can try a little bit of that.
Sadhguru: Yes, it’s a serious problem and an unfortunate problem
because we are living in a land,
which has over 12,000 years of agricultural history,
probably the only place on the planet like this.
As far as I know, except a few other places in South America,
nowhere else on the planet was agriculture organized 12,000 years ago.
So, we have enormous experience of agriculture,
which means the science of producing food,
and we are living in a land where twelve months of the year,
you can grow what you want.
Many farmers in Tamil Nadu take six crops.
Four crops actually but in between the inter cropping,
totally six products they are taking out of the same piece of land.
Vinita Bali: Right.
Sadhguru: Nowhere else on the planet this is really possible.
In spite of this, half the people are hungry,
simply because of apathy,
not because of lack of food,
not because that it is not possible to fulfill this.
I feel a focused effort,
in a matter of five years… five to eight years,
very comfortably, we can crest this.
It should not even take that much time
but if we are determined,
within five years’ time, it is possible to cross this
and it’s important to cross this
because when you say India,
I know lot of poetry has been written about how beautiful it is,
our mountains, our rivers, our whatever.
But for 1.25 billion people,
you neither have enough mountains nor rivers
nor land nor even a piece of sky, believe me.
The only thing that you have is people.
If these people are well-nourished, competent, inspired,
this can be the greatest miracle
but right now, sixty percent of India’s population,
even their skeletal system has not grown to full size
or in other words,
we are producing a totally underdeveloped humanity.
If your body does not grow to its full size,
neither will your brains.
There’s medical evidence to show that first four years of your life,
if you did not get the necessary nourishment,
your brain is approximately sixty percent of what it should be.
So with half-brained people,
the next generation,
what nation are you going to build?
You’re going to be a big disaster.
If you don’t fix nourishment,
we are going to be an enormous disaster.
It’s waiting,
it’s a silent bomb, it doesn’t make noise.
Very quietly, it’s going to implode upon us.
So, this is something that has to be fixed on a war footing.
Must be!
Vinita Bali: So, what is the role?
I know all of us as individuals have a role to play.
We are all part of a corporate,
an academic institution,
part of a community and a society.
So, what do you believe is the responsibility?
I’m not talking about corporate social responsibility.
I’m simply talking about corporate responsibility
when it comes to being part of fixing some of the problems
that you’ve just spoken about?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) I’ve… You know,
we are very much involved with nourishment, education, health of the rural populations.
I’ve been talking to many leading lights.
Not much light out there (Laughter).
Whenever I speak to a lot of people
not all of them, many of them
if I tell them,
“You know, we are planting hundred and fourteen million trees,
you could do something”,
they’ll say
they’ll tell me a very passionate story,
how they… his wife or his mother has a trust
where she planted one hundred and eight trees around their factory
and how they have grown,
how beautiful they are and how it’s
how they are enjoying it.
In all this passion, I just (Gestures)… okay,
what’s there to say.
Hundred and eight trees are good,
I’m not saying no,
but if your capacity was only hundred and eight, I am… I’ll bow down to you.
Your capacity is hundred and eight million, not hundred and eight,
but you are satisfying yourself with hundred and eight.
You talk about nourishment,
you say, “You know what? My maid’s children,
they were so malnourished.
Three of them, every Sunday, we feed them” (Laughter).
These kind of stories I’ve heard of great compassion and love (Laughs).
So, there is a whole culture of doing something for your satisfaction
or doing something because you want to buy a ticket to heaven.
I want people to come to a place
where you being fulfilled should happen within you.
If you want to go to heaven, please leave (Laughter).
But if you want to be a solution, there’s another way to work.
I fed two children and I feel very happy.
It’s all right, I appreciate that,
I’m glad for those two children but this is not a solution,
this is only for satisfaction.
So, it’s time at least those people who are in a certain level of capability,
I would say
When I say capability, all of you will thinking,
“Oh, okay, some big corporate leader.”
I’m saying all of you are in a certain level of capability,
who should see how to bring a solution,
not do something for your silly satisfaction.
You can be satisfied by eating food,
by simply sitting quietly,
by sleeping well, doing whatever.
Satisfaction need not come through somebody else’s suffering.
You don’t have to fulfill your satisfaction because of this
You know, somebody is suffering,
that is not the basis of your suffering
and if you buy a ticket to heaven through that suffering,
I don’t know, heaven will turn into hell probably for you (Laughs).
I hope it does (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: I couldn’t agree with you more (Sadhguru Laughs).
So, I want to explore two or three other dimensions that you spoke about.
You spoke about capacity,
you spoke about leadership.
So, talk to us a little bit about what you see as,
what are
Who are leaders and what is leadership?
Is there a difference, is it…?
Sadhguru: I know there’s a lot of talk about leadership
and wanting to become leaders.
I don’t think anybody should try to become a leader,
it’s quite obscene that
“I want to become a leader”
that means all of you should be what?
I don’t know.
I know what you would like to call yourself (Laughs).
It’s not about you wanting to become a leader
or someone want to be… wanting to become a leader.
Because of a certain thing that you have done within yourself
or a certain level of observation
or a certain intelligence or a certain experience,
you are able to see something that most people are not able to see.
The moment you are able to see something,
then people will naturally look up to you as a leader
because you are seeing something that they cannot see.
And if you become a leader,
there are many ways to become a leader –
you can get elected,
you can get selected,
you can work it,
you can pull other people down and become a leader
or simply people will rise you as a leader
because they see that either you are able to see something
or you are able to do something,
which they themselves cannot do.
I feel this is the way leadership should happen
if you want to call it that
that someone is able to see something and do something that others cannot do,
so everybody wishes he must take charge of the situation
because naturally, he will be able to do something that the others will not be able to do.
So, what is the quality of leadership?
Leadership means,
once you sit on a perch,
you better see clearer than others,
otherwise you will make a ridiculous fool of yourself (Laughs).
There’s a whole… You know, in the nation,
certain things have been happening.
Somebody sits on a perch and he doesn’t see any better than you,
he looks like a fool immediately.
So, it is not about you wanting to sit on the perch,
you wanting to see something must get you to the perch,
not because you want to be above everybody else you get to the perch.
So, what is the quality of a leader?
I don’t think there’s any particular quality.
One thing is
a leader means his sense of life is beyond himself.
It’s not about
His sense of identity is beyond himself.
Somebody becomes a leader because he is willing to think and feel and act
for more people than himself.
If you act for yourself, you are called self-centered.
If you just act for the sake of two or three people you gather in the form of family,
you are named as Dhritarashtra.
There are modern names for that.
If you identify yourself with the entire nation or the world,
you will be looked at in a different way.
Essentially,
your leadership will come from the right context,
depending upon what you are identified with
because everybody needs an identity.
What sort of identity have you taken,
will determine the context and the quality of your leadership.
Vinita Bali: In that context,
isn’t leadership something that, you know,
each of us can individually manifest?
If I were to describe one dimension of leadership
as saying it is about taking ownership to create a better outcome?
In that context,
you know we can convert leadership from a noun to a verb?
Sadhguru: I don’t know that much grammar, okay (Laughter)?
Vinita Bali: But you can try.
Sadhguru: See whatever we do,
every human activity,
the purpose of an activity is to produce something.
Production may be a safety pin, a computer, love, joy, health, well-being,
it doesn’t matter what,
we want to produce something.
When we act, we want it to be effective.
How small an act or how big an act is not the important (thing?).
We want something to happen effectively,
which means it’s a question of efficiency,
it’s a question of with how little,
how much more you could do.
That’s what makes you
because all of us have the same amount of time in a day.
People always tell me,
“Sadhguru, you had such a long day.”
I said, “Unfortunately, there’s no long day, god… you know,
they give me only twenty-four hours.”
I would like to bargain for more but it’s not happening (Laughs).
You can… You can make it more by increasing your efficiency,
the way you function,
including people as a part of yourself
where other people will function as a part of you
so that you don’t have to bother about so many things around you.
In this sense, you can enhance what you do
but time-wise, all of us have the same time, we can’t help it.
So, how much can you produce in how little time, in how little material, is the question.
In the limited span of time, which we have as life,
what is it that we can do?
Is it just about efficiency?
Is it about simply mindless efficiency
“Do better, do better”? No.
At different times in history,
people seem to want different things on the surface.
But essentially,
no matter which time of history, who they are,
which part of the world they are,
everybody wants the same thing – well-being.
But their idea of well-being
Everybody has their idea how to get there,
but everybody wants well-being,
no question about that.
It doesn’t matter which part of the world you go,
whether you came here thousand years ago
or today or hundred years later,
you will see people will be still seeking well-being.
In pursuit of well-being, maybe hundred years ago,
somebody would be going in search of water.
Today, you are going in search of the Wi-Fi cloud (Vinita Bali laughs)
but still well-being.
People’s idea of well-being,
whatever that is,
but people are only well only when something beautiful happens within themselves.
They think they’re going to cause it to themselves by some means
but people have been happy before the Wi-Fi came,
people have been happy before the automobile came,
people have been happy before all the luxuries we are enjoying today, appeared.
So, what I’m saying is
well-being… If you are in pursuit of well-being,
essentially it is about what happens within the human being.
What happens within the human being in the name of so many things
I don’t want to name all the things
in the name of so many things,
what we call as family, society
and another world, which we call as corporate world (Laughs),
all these things we created,
these are all different names or different mechanisms
that we believe will bring well-being to us.
Somebody built a family,
somebody built a corporation
both in pursuit of well-being, isn’t it?
I must tell you this,
the first time I was at Davos, many years ago,
they were almost resentful,
“Why… What is a mystic doing in economic summit” (Laughs)?
I… And a particular CEO who was running
was in charge of a top computer manufacturing company
three months later, they got sold out to the Chinese (Laughter)
Vinita Bali: (Laughs) We can guess who they were (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: So he was very resentful,
“What are you doing here?”
Then I told him, “See, what’s your business?”
He said, “I do computers.”
I said, “See, whether you manufacture a computer or a safety pin or in between anything,
fundamentally, this is about human well-being.
The basic business is human well-being.
You may do it through your computer,
somebody will produce safety pin,
somebody will produce a cloth,
somebody will produce something else.
It doesn’t matter what you’re doing,
the fundamental business is human well-being and that’s my business too,
that’s why I’m here” (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: So Sadhguru, you’ve talked about well-being,
I’ve… You know, one of the things that you say is,
it’s all about how the body, mind, emotions and most importantly,
energy come together
and I think you’ve said it very eloquently,
which says you know, when the body is feeling pleasant, we call it health,
if it is feeling very pleasant, we call it pleasure
and so on and you go on to say
Sadhguru: You can… You can go all the way.
Vinita Bali: Sorry?
Sadhguru: You can go all the way.
Vinita Bali: I can go all the way (Sadhguru Laughs)?
So, when the mind is feeling pleasant, we call it joy,
when it is feeling very pleasant, we call it peace.
When the, you know, when the emotion is feeling pleasant, we call it love,
when it is feeling very pleasant, we call it compassion.
When the energy is feeling pleasant, we call it bliss
and when it is very pleasant, we call it ecstasy.
Sadhguru: You’re a very good student (Applause)!
Vinita Bali: So… So, here is the question.
Can you just elaborate on what you really mean?
What is the difference between bliss and ecstasy?
You know for
for people who are not mystics, what does
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughter)?
Vinita Bali: … what does it look like?
Sadhguru: I think I need to clarify this accusation of being a mystic (Laughter).
On a certain day,
two cows were grazing on the English meadow,
English cows.
Vinita Bali: Got it (Laughter).
The Thomas Hardy kind.
Sadhguru: One cow said to the other,
“What is your opinion about the mad cow disease?”
The other one said, “I don’t care a hoot, I’m anyway a helicopter” (Laughter).
So, what a mystic means is
that there is no mistake about his perception as to who he is (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Okay (Laughs).
Sadhguru: So, there are only two kinds of people
mystics and mistakes (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: That’s an easy one to remember.
Sadhguru: So, a mystic did not fall from somewhere else,
strived to pay attention to simple aspects of life,
very simple things.
Very simple things means extremely simple things.
Just
Right now, how do you know that you are here?
What is the basis, I’m asking?
Vinita Bali: I am talking with you.
Sadhguru: Even when you’re not speaking, you still know that you are here, right?
Vinita Bali: Yeah.
Sadhguru: So, how do you know?
Vinita Bali: I’m perceiving
Sadhguru: What?
Vinita Bali: …that I am in this place,
there is an audience here, we are in conversation
Sadhguru: No, even if you close your eyes, you are still here, right?
Vinita Bali: …I have a mindfulness, I’m attentive to the fact that I’m in conversation, I’m conscious
Sadhguru: You are conscious?
Vinita Bali: I’m conscious.
Sadhguru: The reason that you know that you are here is because you’re conscious.
How do you know that you have a body?
Vinita Bali: Because I can move my hand (Laughter).
Sadhguru: So many things can move.
Vinita Bali: But I am causing my hand to move.
Sadhguru: Fine, even if you don’t move, you know it’s there, right?
How do you know?
Because there is sensation in the body, right?
Vinita Bali: Yeah, yeah.
Sadhguru: If no sensation in your body, you wouldn’t know
whether it’s here or not.
No consciousness, you wouldn’t know whether you are here or not.
Vinita Bali: Right.
Sadhguru: Yes?
Vinita Bali: Yeah.
Sadhguru: So, these are taken for granted things.
If you pay little attention to these things,
you will see there’s a whole world out there,
there’s a whole existence by itself.
Just your sensation,
if you pay enough attention,
you know the nature of your physical existence.
If you pay attention to what you’re calling as my consciousness,
you know the nature of your basic existence.
Once you know the nature of your existence,
that is when you can use this (Referring to oneself) gadget well.
I’m calling this (Referring to oneself) a gadget
because human mechanism is the most sophisticated mechanism on the planet.
We are on top of the evolutionary heap, not for nothing.
It’s taken millions of years to manufacture you.
Yes?
Vinita Bali: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Not… Not a simple process.
An enormous process has happened to get you to this level of neurological sensitivity,
sensations, awareness, everything.
So, these are the keys of your existence
but everybody is reading a book or… they’re looking into
they’re looking at the cosmos through their iPhone.
Nobody is paying attention (Laughs) to this (Referring to oneself)
because this (Referring to oneself) is the basis of your existence.
Only if you know this (Referring to oneself),
you can employ this (Referring to oneself) to its fullest capability.
Even if you take your cell phone, the more you know about it,
the better you can use it, isn’t it?
The same with this (Referring to oneself).
So, what this whole unnecessarily exaggerated
exaggeration is not the word
unnecessarily decorated thing about self-realization means is,
you know more about this (Referring to oneself)
or you know everything that’s worth knowing about this (Referring to oneself).
That means you can use this (Referring to oneself) whichever way you want.
If you want to sit still here for the rest of your life, you can sit.
If you want to jump out and be active, you can do.
If you want to do this and that together, you can do.
Whatever you want, you can do because you know the mechanism fully,
in its entirety, not just the physicality of it,
but its entirety.
So, if you know this (Referring to oneself),
suppose your body happens as per your instruction,
your mind happens as per your instruction,
your life energies happen as per your instruction,
how will you keep it
pleasant or unpleasant?
Vinita Bali: Pleasant.
Sadhguru: Pleasant. At least for yourself, highest level of pleasantness.
What you want for your neighbor may be debatable (Laughter)
but what you want for yourself is clear.
So, when you main… When you want pleasantness,
now generally, if you are very pleasant, we say you are blissful.
Now bliss can get boring sometimes, okay (Laughs)?
Yes?
Vinita Bali: Good to know that.
Sadhguru: Pleasantness gets boring, isn’t it, sometimes?
You want some slosh to happen.
Now you use ecstasy (Laughs).
But that slosh cannot be kept up.
Bliss can be kept for your entire life.
Ecstasy cannot be kept for your entire life.
You go up and you come down
or in other words, bliss is a sustainable level of pleasantness,
the height of pleasantness.
Ecstasy is not sustainable but you can hit it often enough.
At least a few times in a day, you must hit it.
Vinita Bali: You know, in the spirit of a freewheeling conversation,
I’m reminded of a film I saw about -
I think it was fifteen years ago the film was made -
which was a series of conversations with quantum physicists and some mystics,
to use that word.
And the whole premise of the film was
that the mystic and the quantum physicist is seeking an answer to the three basic questions,
which are, “Who am I, where have I come from and where am I going?”
I did not understand the film then (Sadhguru laughs).
I am hoping that you would be able to throw some light
on the three questions and you know,
what the physicists and the mystics are seeking?
Sadhguru: So, you are asking me who you are (Laughter)?
Vinita Bali: Kind of.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) See, it’s all right to walk on the street,
point at one of you and say, “Who are you?”
It’s okay.
You go to somebody and say, “Who am I” (Laughter)?
This happened in the Cincinnati airport.
People had lined up to check in at the check-in counter.
One man came briskly, jumped the line,
went straight to the counter and thrust his ticket.
The lady at the counter said,
“Sir, there is a line, please.”
He said, “No, no, I’m in a hurry.”
“Well,” she said, “Everybody is in a hurry,
you are all getting on the same plane.
So, please stand in the line.”
Then he raised his voice, “Do you know who I am?”
She looked at him, promptly picked up the microphone and said,
“There is a man here who does not know who he is,
can somebody help him, please” (Laughter/Applause)?
So, you should never address this question to someone else (Laughter).
All this so-called whatever
I don’t know, I don’t want to make comments
they all picked it up because
that Ramana Maharishi’s book I think became famous in California, okay?
everywhere you go, everybody is talking,
“Who am I? Who I… Who are you?”
“Who am I?” is a question that should be addressed within you,
digging… every time you ask it, digging it deeper and deeper and deeper into yourself.
You never go and ask somebody, “Who am I?”
That smacks of something else.
I was (Laughs)… I was teaching a program in Los Angeles
and this is of
like maybe hundred and fifty, two hundred people.
Half of them all are Hollywood types
and a whole lot of them look alike, many… especially women,
not because they are sisters,
because they have the same doctor (Laughter/Applause).
And I am teaching them an extremely simple process that they need to do every day,
which is just twenty-one minutes,
extremely simple.
Just that,
they are saying,
“Sadhguru, you’re teaching us all these things
but Ramana Maharishi said, ‘You don’t have to do anything.’”
Tch, ohh, Ramana came all this way from Thiruvannamalai (Laughter/Applause)?
I said, “Yes, he is absolutely correct.
You don’t have to do anything and he did nothing.
He simply sit
sat in one place like this (Gestures), fourteen years.
Rats came and bit into his thighs,
festering wounds, worms came out of it but he did nothing,
simply sat,”
I said, “You people are made like this
if a mosquito bites you, you’ll call 911 (Laughter).
You don’t talk about doing nothing” (Laughs).
I said, “Ramana talks about doing nothing, leave that, that’s not your business.
You are made like this,
you don’t talk about doing nothing.”
Ramana talked about “Who am I? who am I?”
You never utter this to anybody.
Don’t ever go and
Please all of you (Laughter),
don’t go somewhere and ask them… someone, “Who am I?”
You can ask them, “Who are you” (Laughs)?
So, “Who am I?” is not even a question that you need to articulate.
When… I just said, the more you know about it,
the better you can exist here.
Not necessarily
Don’t always think about a human being like he is some kind of a machine,
how much he has to produce, there’s no such thing
but how he exists is important.
When you sit here,
how are you within yourself is important,
what you wear may be socially important,
what you drive may be important somewhere else,
what you… what kind of home you live in may be important for some other reason
but existentially, there’s only one thing important
how are you within yourself?
Are you pleasant or unpleasant every moment of your life?
In twenty-four hours, how many moments of pleasantness,
how many moments of unpleasantness
and how much support does it need to keep you pleasant
that’s the question.
Right now, in pursuit of human well-being,
we’ve ripped the planet apart
and still, well-being is not happening.
Comfort has happened, convenience has happened,
well-being for sure has not happened, isn’t it?
As a generation of people,
we are the most comfortable generation ever,
never before anybody could even imagine these things.
But we cannot say we are the most joyful or blissful or ecstatic generation.
No!
Are we worse than others?
I don’t believe so,
every generation - same nonsense.
Some people lived fantastic within themselves,
others went through all the nonsense they had to go through.
This is not because of what’s happening to them.
See there are two kinds of suffering
physical pain can happen to you because somebody may cause something to you,
somebody has no food, the
you’re in a war zone or somebody is poking you.
I’m asking all of you – in the last twenty-five years,
how many times it happened to you, somebody took a knife and poked you?
For most of you, it didn’t happen.
Maybe when you are in… in your school,
somebody poked you with a pin at the most
or you were not even worth that, nobody poked you (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: They simply poked fun.
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Vinita Bali: They simply poked fun at you.
Sadhguru: Whichever way.
Physically, how many times suffering entered you from outside?
Very, very minimal,
rest is all self-help (Laughter).
You know, in Tamil Nadu, the government has a scheme,
“Namakku name” (Laughter).
“Namagae naavae” (in Kannada), it means.
That means people are on self-help, busy,
causing suffering to themselves daily (Laughter) - sit, stand, whatever happens.
See, you will see people, most of them are driving their dream machines on Bangalore streets, all right?
How many are driving joyfully?
If we… If the traffic light takes ten more seconds,
they are freaking in their dream machine (Laughter).
Is it not a blessing that you bought this dream machine
after working for whatever number of years,
why don’t you
The traffic is making sure, you stay in your dream machine for a little longer,
what’s your problem (Laughter/Applause)?
I am saying, just about anything people are suffering.
So suffering is not happening
because of something else,
it’s simply because people do not know
how to manage their body, their mind, their energies, their emotion, nothing
because no attention has been paid.
No attention to the nature of who you are, has not been paid.
So who you are, “Who am I?” question is internally
entirely internalized question.
Never to be uttered, never to be written down.
Unfortunately, somebody printed it and the whole world is talking,
“Who am I?
Who am I” (Laughs)?
You (Laughs)
This is okay if you’re a (an?) inpatient.
If you’re an inpatient, in NIMHANS (Referring to National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore)
you ask, “Who am I?” (Laughter), that’s allowed,
that’s allowed.
If you are out on the street, you are not allowed to ask, “Who am I” (Laughs)?
You get me (Laughs)?
Vinita Bali: You’ve also talked about
Sadhguru: No, there are other two questions in that (Laughter/Applause).
Vinita Bali: Yes. Yes, yes, I’m waiting for those two questions.
Sadhguru: Where are you going (Laughter)?
There’s only one way to find out, you must go and see (Laughter).
As I was saying just now,
some things are best known only by experience.
People want to know,
“After my death, what will happen?”
I tell them, you must know by experience (Laughter).
Are you ready?
No.
Then don’t worry, wait (Laughter).
“Where did I come from?”
See essentially, what you are asking is,
all three… three questions put together,
you are asking “What is the nature of my existence?
Am I this body,
am I this,
am I that,
what am I,
what is the nature?”
Because whichever way you look at it, you can prove “I’m that”,
because for everything there’s some substance.
You can prove yourself to be a woman,
you can say, “I’m not this, I’m a human being,”
you can say, “I’m just a piece of life,”
you can say, “I’m god,”
somebody may think you are something else.
Doesn’t matter (Laughs)
but for everything, there is some substance,
so you can argue for it but that’s not the point.
Really, what is the nature of your existence?
Don’t take this as some kind of a great philosophical or spiritual question.
Please see it as a practical thing.
If you want to know how to use this camera well,
the more you know about it, the better it is.
You agree with me?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Similarly if you want to use this (Referring to oneself),
if you want to use this human being properly,
the more you know about it, the better it is.
So, selfrealization is a very practical thing,
not an esoteric thing.
What you think is esoteric is
All the things that you don’t have an understanding of,
you want to make it esoteric
or you want to make it mystical.
Let’s understand this word mysticism or mystical.
Anything that you don’t understand will look mystical to you, isn’t it?
Suppose you don’t know what’s electricity,
you have no concept of that,
now I press something here (Gestures), boom, lights come on.
Very mystical for you, isn’t it?
See, if I just had a light bulb a thousand years ago,
I could have claimed, “I am god” and it would have worked.
Tch, came too late, you know (Laughter)?
So, the more you know about it, the better you will live.
This is not something that you seek at the end your life,
this should be the first step of your life,
if you value your life.
Yes?
Knowing this (Referring to oneself) should be the first step of your life.
Very beginning of your life, this question should be asked.
Can I tell you a story?
Vinita Bali: Please.
Sadhguru: There was a
a Bishop in the Greek Catholic order.
The Greek Orthodox church believes they are the only real Christians,
others are not really Christians.
They think they are the only pure Christians,
others are not really that.
They have their own pope in Istanbul.
So, it became a very small group over a period of time (Laughs) for whatever reasons.
So, being on the Silk Route,
many fantastic stories from India are wafting across the Bosporus
and these stories are going on about the mystics and the yogis and the magic of India,
which the Indians have not seen and everybody else has seen (Laughter).
So, he always wanted to go to India
but being a man of cloth, he could not really choose where to go.
After sixty years of age,
when his… when he is semi-retired,
he got an opportunity and he came to southern India
and he found the right kind of guides,
somebody told him, “You go up this mountain,”
and they gave him the landmarks and
“Here, there’s one yogi, he is the right one to meet for you.”
So he climbed up the mountain.
The man is not made for mountains, you know?
Mountains demand certain things from you (Laughs).
So, he went up and as they had said, there was a yogi,
sitting in front of a cave, blissed out.
He went and he had heard that if you see a Indian yogi, you have to prostrate,
tch, but for that also you need some fitness.
This is a part of the Indian thing because that’s the only exercise most Indians do (Laughter).
So, whatever you see, you just bow down
but now they have learnt (Gestures) (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: A short cut there too.
Sadhguru: Yes, the idea is to touch the floor.
Every time, every time you keep doing it through the day,
it’s a good exercise, you don’t have to spend extra time for exercise.
So, he struggled and scraping himself and sat up.
All this commotion,
the yogi opened his eyes and smiled.
So, the bishop asked,
“Can I ask you a question?”
The yogi said, “By all means.”
The bishop asked, “What is life?”
Tch, this is after sixty (Laughter),
the damn question you should have asked when you were six,
at least sixteen. you must have asked.
No, sixty, all right, better late than never,
some time you asked.
So, when he asked this question, “What is life?”
the yogi went into raptures and then he said,
“Life
Life is like the fragrance of jasmine upon gentle spring breeze.”
The bishop looked like this (Gestures),
“What!
Fragrance of jasmine on gentle spring breeze
but our teacher told us,
‘Life is like a thorn.
Once it gets into you. If you sit, it hurts, if you lie down, it hurts,
if you stand up, it hurts’ (Laughter)
and you are saying it is fragrance of jasmine, spring breeze and all this stuff.”
The yogi smiled and said,
“Well! That’s his life” (Laughter/Applause).
So, we have never paid attention to the most important dimension of who you are
and you do not know life any other way than the way it happens within you,
yes?
You are the only doorway to the existence for yourself,
you can only experience through this mechanism and no other way.
If you don’t know this (Referring to oneself),
what the hell are you doing here?
And just because you know this (Referring to oneself),
people label you as a mystic, as this,
he is that and many people mispronounce it (Laughs),
as a mistake, you know (Laughter)?
Vinita Bali: So, one of the other things that you’ve talked about is,
you know, the mind,
what… and these are my words what I’ve understood of what you’ve said,
you know, what the mind believes, the heart follows.
You know, what is in the mind is in the heart
Sadhguru: No, no.
Vinita Bali: …in a sense, if I’ve got it right,
unless I’ve got it wrong.
And you know, because when you say that there is no difference between, you know,
my mind is saying this but my heart is saying is something else
Sadhguru: You’re talking about a metaphoric heart or your heart-heart?
Vinita Bali: I am talking about metaphoric
Sadhguru: Okay.
Vinita Bali: ...I’m not talking about
Sadhguru: Okay, not the pump?
Vinita Bali: I’m talking about metaphoric heart, not the heart that is, you know simply pumping.
There is something else, you know,
which I’ve read some time back which says that,
you know, you’ve got to search in your heart with your intellect.
So, there are all these things which is about the mind and the heart
and you know, how you apply intelligence and perception
to create awareness
and I think you’ve talked about that a little bit.
Would you elaborate for us, you know, the concept of intellect,
intelligence,
perception and you know,
how we can use that in our everyday lives?
Sadhguru: See, there’s whole lot of enterprise going on in the world
by complicating very simple aspects of life,
really (Laughs).
If you complicate something with incomprehensible words
and if you have lot of words to do it,
then you will seem profound because anyway,
nobody can understand what the hell it is (Laughter).
So, searching your heart with your intellect
the thing that you are referring to as your heart
is generally the emotional side of you.
So, you’re separating what is thought and what is emotion.
Let me ask you a simple question.
If you look at yourself carefully in your day-to-day activity,
you will notice this
the way you think is the way you emote.
Right now, if I think you are such a wonderful person,
I will have sweet emotions towards you.
Vinita Bali: Which I hope you are thinking (Laughter).
Sadhguru: This is not a confession (Laughter).
If I have… If I think, “She is horrible,” I’ll have nasty emotions towards you.
I cannot think you are wonderful and have nasty emotions towards you.
I cannot think you are horrible and have sweet emotions towards you.
It is impractical and it’s not possible.
People act those things and it never works.
People – “I hate her but I’ll be nice to her
they will go like this (Gestures) and do like this (Gestures) (Laughter), you know?
Have you seen this happening?
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Sadhguru: Nice things are done in a horrible way (Laughs).
It is happening in families, among friends, whatever
nice things are done in such a horrible way.
If you want to do something horrible, just do something horrible at least.
Don’t spoil the nice things in a horrible way (Laughs).
So, now, the question is just this
Thought and emotion, are they same
or are they two different realms?
They are not.
Thought is agile.
See, today I can think… Right now, I think you are wonderful.
To… Just next moment, you did something I don’t like, I think you are horrible.
My thought immediately changes because it is agile
but my emotion is sappy, it’ll take three days,
it’ll struggle and slowly turn around.
It has a larger turning arc but after three days,
it’ll come my way.
For some people, it’s three days, some people, three months but they will turn around, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
The way you think is the way you feel, there is no other way.
It is also true, the way you feel is the way you think also.
It depends which is more dominant in you.
In a person, if emotion is forefront, the way they feel is the way they think.
If thought is forefront, the way they think is the way they feel.
You can’t think one way and feel another way,
that only happens temporarily for some time but emotion will catch up.
Vinita Bali: So, Sadhguru, what is a creative mind?
Sadhguru: Oh! How big an answer do you want?
Vinita Bali: As big as you want it.
Sadhguru: See, the English word mind doesn’t say anything
because it’s just one generic word,
which does not describe different dimensions of what the mind is.
Mind is not just one something sitting here (Gestures) and doing something, okay?
There is really no such thing as mind.
In the yogic culture, there is no mind.
There is a physical body,
there is a mental body
because what you are calling as mind right now
is a certain combination of memory and intelligence.
There is memory in your body,
more memory in your body than you can imagine.
If I have to get at you again, it’s okay,
I’m picking on you.
You definitely don’t remember how your great-great-great-great-great-grandmother looked like
but her nose is sitting on your face right now.
Yes?
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t remember a thing consciously
but your body remembers one hundred percent.
How ten generations ago,
your grandmother was, your body still remembers.
A million years ago, how your forefathers were,
your… still your body remembers, isn’t it?
It’s not forgotten and it’s not going to forget.
Your mind is not capable of this kind of memory.
Your body has a trillion times more memory than your so-called brain.
This whole shift towards the brain and intellectual process
is a European malaise
they gave too much significance to thought.
This has happened because they lived under a subjugated society,
religiously subjugated society where you are not supposed to think anything except
what’s written in some book, otherwise you are dead.
They lived like this for a longtime.
Because of this, when they got little freedom to think and managed to live,
they started celebrating their thought too much.
Let’s understand the context of thought.
You can only think from the data that you already have gathered.
That means you can never think anything new.
You can recycle it,
you can rehash it,
you can produce permutations and combinations of it
but you cannot think something absolutely new.
It is not in the nature of the thought to come up with something new.
It can only recycle the past.
That means if you dedicate yourself to your thought process,
if you enshrine your thought process,
you are ensuring nothing new ever happens in your life.
So thought need not be celebrated like this.
That’s why in this culture,
thought is never been given so much significance.
What you think is your psychological drama.
We don’t think much about that (Laughs)
because it’s your drama.
Your drama is important for you,
somebody else’s drama, it’s important for them,
everybody thinks their drama is the most important drama in the universe.
This is everybody’s experience
because they are so identified with their own psychological drama.
This psychological drama should not determine the nature of your life
because this is just a small happening compared to the life process.
Life is a much deeper intelligence than intellect.
We can look at
The yogic system looks at the mind as sixteen parts.
Those sixteen parts are further broken
and they’re taken up to 84,000 parts.
But now, if I talk about 84,000,
already there’s a segment which says no,
so I will make it four.
I am taking away eighty, okay?
I’m being fair to you -
only four!
Four fundamental parts.
One is the intellect, which we have
In modern world, in today’s world,
we are unnecessarily giving too much significance to intellect
and we will pay an enormous price for this.
You will come to a place where you’ll know everything
but you’ll know nothing of life significance,
really.
Today, you will see this happening to children.
For the first time, this generation you see
ten, eleven-year-old or twelve-year-old children,
they look bored.
When you were ten-eleven, you did not what is boredom, it was not possible.
It was too exciting to be alive and looking around.
You will see ten, twelve-year-old children,
all looking bored
because they’ve seen the cosmos through their phone screen.
They know it all
and especially in the western countries,
you will see this happening at eight-ten,
they are really bored. You will see in the school buses,
they are all sitting like this (Gestures) (Laughter),
bored,
because by the time you are twelve,
you already had one love affair,
you know what is a break,
you know how to… all this recover from that,
you tasted alcohol,
you’ve seen this,
probably you’ve gone into all kinds of physical things
and you know the cosmos.
What more?
By the time you’re fifteen, there’s really no purpose for you to exist, for many of them.
You should not be surprised,
if this culture continues -
I’m not saying this as a prediction,
it is something that I see beginning to happen
in another fifty or hundred years’ time,
if twenty-five to fifty percent of the people commit suicide,
you should not be surprised
because life needs some exuberance.
If too much information happens to you without experience,
that exuberance will be gone and a sense of
false sense of knowing becomes so strong in you.
This is the danger of intellect because
intellects wants to… intellect wants to dissect everything.
Intellect is like a scalpel - the sharper it is, the better it is.
It wants to dissect and know.
Dissection works with some things,
not with all aspects of life.
If you want to know… The poor frog, you know,
you remember, tch,
the poor frog that you crucified and cut and great knowledge
you acquired from all that torture is unbelievable (Laughter).
How much knowledge you know
For the torture that that frog went through,
how much knowledge you have acquired is quite unbelievable.
All that you got to know.
Now you’ve got interest
suddenly you got interested,
the mother that you had ignored,
you want to know your mother today.
Please get yourself a sharp knife,
start the dissection.
You may know everything about her liver, kidney, heart
but you won’t have a mother left, that’s all.
So, life cannot be known by breaking it up.
You can know physical things by breaking it up.
You cannot know life by breaking it into pieces
but this is the nature of the intellect.
The whole modern science has evolved from human intellect.
Because it’s produced technological benefits,
you can’t argue against it
because people, you know (Laughs),
they… they think they are scientists,
they know nothing about science.
They’re just enjoying their iPhone.
They think they are scientists because they can do this (Gestures).
No,
technology is fine, it’s brought much comfort and convenience
but it’ll not bring life to us.
So, intellect is like this.
Intellect will be useful only depending upon
what it is identified with and what is held,
what holds this, how steadily.
So, the next dimension of the mind
The first one is called as buddhi, which is the intellect.
The second one is called as ahankara.
Ahankara does not mean ego, this, that, it means the identity.
Whatever you’re identified with, your intellect functions only around that.
Simple, if you just identify with a nation,
if you say, “I’m an Indian,” everything Indian looks beautiful.
If you cross the border and you say you are something else,
all that looks beautiful.
So, whatever you’re identified with, it’s only with that the intellect functions.
So ahankara is the identity.
How consciously and how steadily your ahankara has been created
will determine the effectiveness of your intellect.
Just because it’s sharp,
it does not mean it’ll be effective
because sharp intellect or a sharp knife can cause any amount of damage to you.
If you have a sharp knife
and you don’t have a steady hand,
you will cut yourself all over the place.
That’s all that’s happening.
Human suffering is just this
you don’t know how to hold this intellect in your hand properly.
Every day, you’re cutting yourself.
Self
All suffering is on self-help because
your own mind causing this to you all the time.
No matter what happens, people suffer, whichever way, they suffer,
because they don’t know how to hold this intellect.
If you had the mind of an earthworm, you would be quite peaceful.
Yes (Laughs)?
You’re trying to do it in so many ways to reduce the sharpness of the intellect
by drink, by drug, by overeating, by doing all kinds of things,
somehow to take away the sharpness
because the damn thing hurts.
It hurts not because that’s its nature,
it hurts because you do not know how to hold it.
The next dimension of the mind is called as manas,
which is a huge volume of memory.
It is not here or there, entire body carries memory.
So manomayakosha, this is called,
a huge sack of memory.
This memory is in various stacks,
we’ll not go into all these details
considering some people have said a clear no.
They don’t want to have a mind,
I’m sorry, they don’t want to know anything about the mind (Laughter).
So, the fourth dimension of the mind is called as chitta.
Chitta means it’s pure intelligence.
It is unsullied by memory,
it has no trace of any kind of memory,
it’s just pure intelligence.
If you touch this,
then you have access to what you are referring as the source of creation
because all kinds of things might have been fed to you
god is this,
god is love,
god is compassion,
god is kind,
what… whatever (Laughs).
Somebody come, stand on the edge of this stage,
say all the prayer you want to say and fall.
Let me see whether compassion happens to you
or a cracked bone happens to you,
I would like to check, all right?
All these things have been made up because whatever somebody is deprived of,
they will attribute that quality to their idea of god.
Your ideas of god have come
only because you do not know what
how this whole creation happened.
Because you don’t have an answer,
you made it up.
Because you are human being,
you said, “A big human being is sitting up there.
Oh, how can he do all this?”
if somebody asked, he has ten hands,
so he does lot of things not like you,
whatever.
It’s all right for children
but essentially, because you do not how creation happened,
you are coming up with explanations.
So, that which is the source of creation
don’t believe what I say, what anybody says
pay attention to one piece of creation.
Just take a flower, pay attention to this,
pay an attention to a leaf or an atom or an ant
all you will see is phenomenal intelligence beyond anything you can imagine.
Yes?
But nobody told you,
“God is intelligence.”
But this culture has said this to you in many ways
they told you chidhakasha, chidambara and so many things to tell you,
if you touch your chit, the whole existence becomes yours.
Everything that’s worth knowing is right here (Gestures)
because you have access to the source of creation.
So, these are the four types of your
four dimensions of your mind.
Unfortunately, the modern education thinks by just feeding information
and keeping the intellect reasonably sharp,
everything is going to happen
no!
You will rip this planet apart looking for well-being,
you may lose the planet
or you may manage to go to another planet and start your work again there (Laughter)
but well-being will not happen.
If well-being has to happen,
you have to dig a little deeper into this one (Referring to oneself),
otherwise no.
Vinita Bali: So Sadhguru,
what are some of the things that you know,
all of us who are here listening to you,
what are the one or two things that we can do tomorrow,
which will
which will increase this level of awareness,
perception,
thoughtfulness?
Sadhguru: Oh! You’re talking about a takeaway, hmm?
Vinita Bali: In a sense but you know,
an enduring takeaway.
It’s not light hearted, it’s not you know.
because we’ve… you know.
we’ve heard a lot and I’m sitting here and saying, okay,
so what do I do differently tomorrow?
Sadhguru: Let’s say to learn A-B-C,
the twenty-six alphabets
at least if you had learned the Indian… Indian languages, you know fifty-four whatever
twenty-six alphabets,
how long did you take to learn to write them properly in their proper order
and use them whichever way you want,
how long did you take?
Vinita Bali: Oh! I’m still at it, a long time.
Sadhguru: At least three- four years minimum.
Vinita Bali: Yeah, yeah.
Sadhguru: To learn to make sentences and use the way you want,
maybe you took twelve-fifteen years of education.
Vinita Bali: Much longer than that, yes.
Sadhguru: Yes?
So, you gave so much just to learn some word craft
but to know something about the fundamental nature of your existence,
which could just change you dimensionally,
you want to know it in two minutes.
Why are you so unfair?
Vinita Bali: No, I only want to know where to start in two minutes.
Sadhguru: Okay. Where to start?
Just do this much
before you go to bed today, one thing is,
every hour, okay, remind yourself,
right now it’s going to be eight o’ clock,
eight o’ clock remind yourself – “Wow! I’m still alive” (Laughter).
No, don’t laugh.
So many people who go to bed today will not wake up tomorrow morning.
More than a million people on the planet will not wake up tomorrow morning.
Tomorrow morning, suppose you wake up, (Laughter)
Yes, who knows?
You always think, “It’s not me, it’s going to be somebody” (Laughter)
very cruel (Laughs).
Tomorrow morning if you do wake up,
first check (Gestures) “Am I really awake, alive?
I’m still alive, wow!”
You don’t have to do anything,
don’t scream or something (Laughter),
at least one big smile,
“Okay, I’m still alive,
over a million people didn’t wake up tonight
but here I am, alive”
fantastic or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: What is the biggest thing in your life?
You are alive right now.
So, you’re still on tomorrow morning – just one smile,
wow (Gestures)!
Then maybe there are two, three, four people who matter to you much in your life,
just check (Gestures) (Laughter),
he and she and that one and this one is alive
all alive, great! If one million people died tonight,
which they do every night,
at least ten million people lost somebody who is dear to them
but none of those, who are very dear to you are gone today,
fantastic or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Tch, another big smile,
don’t tell anybody (Laughter),
just smile, okay, great.
Eight o’ clock in the morning – wow, eight o’ clock, still alive.
Every one hour, just do this exercise, okay?
Every one hour, just remind yourself,
check (Gestures)
on.
Please understand this,
if you think about god, you will become hallucinatory.
Only when you are conscious about your mortality,
will you want to truly know the nature of this life (Referring to oneself).
When you know you’re on right now
and tomorrow morning, you may be poof, gone,
now you want to know,
“What the hell?
What is this (Referring to oneself)?”
I’m real right now but tomorrow morning, gone.
So many people who are so real and on, suddenly gone.
Can’t believe where did they go
but you thought about it for ten minutes
and then you got busy.
You had to text, “My father is dead” (Laughter).
But remind yourself of your own mortality.
Let the question deepen.
If you can do it every moment, it’s great.
If you cannot, at least once a hour,
remind yourself that you are mortal.
You are not immortal, you are mortal.
If you know that you are mortal,
suddenly you will see in a few days,
you have no time to do any nonsense, which doesn’t mean anything to you.
You will do only what really matters to your life.
You have no time to do any rubbish with anybody.
You will have time only to make the
do the best things that you want to do,
what you truly care to do in your life
and nothing other than that
and that’s what you should be doing
because it’s a very limited amount of time (Applause).
I want you to know it’s a very brief life
that is, if you’re a joyful person.
If you are a miserable person, of course it’s a long life (Laughter).
So (Laughs),
if you’re joyful, if you live for hundred years, it’s gone too quickly.
If you’re miserable, what a long life you will live, you know.
So, it’s a very brief life,
you should not be doing anything other than what truly matters to you, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: But you are doing so much nonsense,
which doesn’t mean anything to you,
simply because you think you are immortal.
Otherwise people are saying,
“No, I will live up to eighty, maybe hundred.
So, I will do this at seventy.
I will… I will smile at my neighbor when I am seventy-five you know,
when all my work is done (Laughter).
When all the property issues are settled (Laughter),
after that I’ll smile at him.”
There is no such guarantee.
Has anybody here come with a guarantee card for two days (Laughter)?
No, you could be dead tomorrow morning.
I’m not wishing that, I bless you with a long life
but it’s possible, right?
Every day, it’s happening to a million people means,
can’t it be you and me tomorrow morning, I’m asking?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you are conscious of your mortality,
becoming aware will naturally happen
because the significance of being alive will blossom.
You used all kinds of words,
which are straight from the American coast
mindfulness, awareness, mental alertness
no, you need to separate these things.
Being mentally alert will help you to survive better.
If I’m mentally alert, I can drive better,
I can do my work better,
I can do something else better,
it’s survival.
Vinita Bali: Right.
Sadhguru: Awareness is not about survival.
When I first asked you the question, how do you know that you’re here,
you went around and then you said, “I’m conscious.”
Only because you are aware, you’re alive.
Your awareness is aliveness,
your aliveness is awareness
the question is only about how alive.
Lot of people think if they are fifty percent alive, it’s pretty good.
Yes,
you can survive fifty percent
but you need to understand, if we want to torture somebody
if you want to torture somebody, what would you do?
You’ll kill them?
Suppose you got… got employment in hell, let’s say,
you’re given the job of torturing people, what will you do?
Kill them?
Hello?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: No. Keep them half alive (Laughter/Applause).
If you keep them half alive, that’s called torture.
So right now, this is called self-torture,
maybe you’re preparing for employment elsewhere (Laughter).
Because right from the age of two or three, people
your parents are asking you, “What will you become?
What will you become?”
Well, I’m born as a human being,
I’m supposed to strive to become a human being.
See, every life on this planet,
whether it is a bird it’s a worm, insect, bird, animal, tree,
whatever,
every one of them is striving
to become a full-fledged life and that’s all.
A worm is trying to be a full-fledged worm,
a tree is trying to be a full-fledged tree -
that’s all a human being also,
to become a full-fledged human being.
No, no, what will you become means
what kind of job will you get – from the age of three (Laughs)!
This madness has come because of this whatever
the last century of poverty in the country,
people are so deprived and they think if they don’t have a job,
they won’t eat anything. Tch, you know,
it comes from a certain poverty consciousness
we must pass it, that generation is passed.
Right now,
if you have a few brain cells working,
you can make a living,
yes?
You don’t have to be qualified for anything.
If you have a few brain cells working in your head, you can make a living,
that’s not a issue anymore.
There was a time it was like that,
it's no more like that, it’s time we leave that,
it’s not about what you will become,
how you will be.
What will be the experience of your life?
Will it become the peak experience
or is it just a mediocre nonsense –
this is the question.
Because once you have come as a human being, whatever happens, it’s not enough,
something more needs to happen.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You may think you’re doing different things.
The man who goes to the temple,
the man who goes to the bar,
the man who goes to work,
the man who goes to conquer the world,
every one of them is just seeking a larger slice of life.
Some people go to the mall,
some people go the PDS,
just like that
some people think it… it comes free in the temple,
so they go there,
somebody else go to conquer the world,
somebody goes shopping.
What is it that you’re trying to do?
Just trying to have a larger slice of life.
But it doesn’t matter if you gather the whole world around you,
you will not have a larger slice.
Your larger slice will happen only if your ability to perceive is enhanced.
If your ability to experience is not enlarged,
then you can have everything around you,
still your experience is the same.
Modern life is just that.
No other generation had the things that we are having around us,
most homes are looking like a warehouse (Laughter)
because their shopping trips,
they don’t know where to keep it,
everything is falling all over the people,
there’s no place for the people,
full of things,
but does it bring well-being or happiness or anything?
No.
You cannot determine the experience of what’s happening within you from outside.
It has to happen from within
and it is… How enlarged your experience is,
is how big your life is,
not about socially how big people think you are.
That may work socially a few things for you
but it doesn’t work in terms of life.
So, when we say awareness,
we are talking about the essential ingredient of life
because only because you are aware, you’re alive. Isn’t it so?
Yes?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Now the question is, how alive?
If you have to use an analogy - right now, this light is, you know, blinding me (Laughs).
Now if you reduce the voltage, it’ll be like this (Gestures),
it’ll light up only that much (Gestures).
But they want it to light up everything,
so they turned up the voltage.
So, if you turn down the voltage,
you will see only this much (Gestures),
if you turn it up, you will see that much (Gestures),
if you really turn it up, you will see the entire hall.
Awareness is the same thing.
Because you are conscious or you are aware,
you know something.
If you become little more aware,
you will know something more,
if you know (become?) little more aware, something more.
All these words are connected – pragna, the word guru,
all these things are connected because
pragna means you’re conscious.
Because you are conscious,
depending upon the intensity of your consciousness,
accordingly your vision of everything around you is enhanced.
Now the word guru means,
gu means darkness – tch, it’s a four letter word you know (Laughs)
ru means dispeller.
So a guru is not supposed to teach you something,
he is not supposed to give you a philosophy,
not supposed to give you an ideology.
It is just that he is supposed to throw little more light.
Little more light means,
Suppose this hall is dark and you’re only able to see the first two rows,
you are not able to see them (Gestures),
if I flashed a torch light,
you saw, “Oh, all those people,
it’s a whole world out there.”
But I switched off the torch, then you know,
“There is something, now I have to see. What do I need?
I need a torch beam of my own, okay” (Laughs)?
This is the job. (Laughs)
Because they… the children in the home where I am staying,
they’re declaring, “He is… He is not like a guru,
he doesn’t talk like a guru,
he doesn’t look like a guru,
he doesn’t walk like a guru,
he’s not a guru” (Laughter).
I’m very glad, I’m getting certified (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Now, about seeing everything the way it is
because if I want to walk through this
There’re whole lot of people right now, belief systems,
you believe in god, all right?
Now, I know in the corporate world,
people have shifted this,
“I believe in myself” (Laughs).
Vinita Bali: Which is somewhat misplaced but that’s okay (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: Both are misplaced,
they produce different kinds of impacts.
Vinita Bali: Absolutely.
Sadhguru: See, belief means what?
Essentially, belief means you’re unwilling to admit
what you do not know as “I do not know”.
Whatever you do not know, you believe.
If you believe, what it does to you is,
it’ll give you confidence.
Confidence without clarity is a disaster.
Right now, let us say,
I cannot see these people (Gestures),
my vision is not clear but I have great confidence,
I’m going to walk through these people.
You know what I will do?
I’ll step over everybody and go because I’m very confident.
There’re whole lot of people like this.
If my vision is clear,
I will go through this without even touching anybody.
If my vision is not clear and I have no confidence,
I will ask, “Please, can somebody show me the way?”
But now, I have no clarity but I have confidence
it’s a disastrous process.
So believing in god,
believing in yourself,
believing in anything means – it’s just a “b” word, you know?
You’re just bullshitting yourself about something that you do not know (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Right, right.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Wha… What is the problem,
“What I know, I know, what I do not know, I do not know” –
what is the problem with this?
If this much sincerity enters your life,
come to this much –
“What I know, I know, what I do not know, I do not know.
I don’t believe anything,
I don’t disbelieve anything,
I am willing to look at everything.”
You’ll become a sensible human being
and every one hour, you remind yourself you are mortal
and once … you know, celebrate with a smile that you’re still alive,
you will see wonders will happen to you (Laughs).
Vinita Bali: Thank you. Great (Applause)!
So, even a free-flowing
Sadhguru: Hey, wait, wait, it’s eight o’ clock.
Vinita Bali: No, no, no, no, we have more time (Laughter),
we have more time,
I was just going to say
Sadhguru: No, I... I’m not saying that, it’s eight o’ clock
you’re still alive, wow (Laughter/Applause)!
Vinita Bali: We are all alive (Applause)!
That’s the collective celebration (Sadhguru laughs).
Okay,
so even a free-flowing conversation is limited by time,
we’ve got about twenty minutes left
and what I’d like to do is throw the floor open to questions from any of you.
(Questioner): my question is directly… direct and very simple.
I learnt a simple process which says that you know,
whenever doubt arises in our life, you know,
doubt the doubt
and whenever trust arises, trust the trust.
So that helped me a lot in terms of my
Vinita Bali: So your question would be?
Questioner: My question is now that the ultimate,
next step we are saying,
the ultimate as the final step,
I would like to ask is dissolution or what we call moksha, hmm?
That is one area, which you know, I don’t know how to take a, you know,
step forward.
I don’t know whether I… my question is clear.
Sadhguru: You want to dissolve (Laughter)?
Okay.
Questioner: That is the ultimate process.
Sadhguru: You need a barrel of sulphuric acid (Laughter).
Please, sit down.
Vinita Bali: Okay, can we have s
Sadhguru: No, we will answer that question.
Vinita Bali: Should we take one or two other questions,
if you are okay with that?
Sadhguru: But you won’t get this kind of a question (Laughter/Applause).
Vinita Bali: Okay, we won’t get this.
All right (Applause), all right.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) See, the reason why the so-called spiritual process
has fallen upon ridicule in the world is
well, there may be few entrepreneurs who do their own things,
leave them,
I’m not going into that
but the reason why spiritual process has become ridiculous on the planet is
because people try to do the highest things on the street side,
without the necessary committed atmosphere,
without the necessary focus,
simply talk about mukti, moksha. You know,
in the previous generation, everybody talked about mukti, moksha,
just about anywhere, sitting, standing.
Whenever life became mi… miserable, they want moksha,
when it’s going well, they forget about moksha (Laughs).
Their idea of moksha itself is convoluted.
So this is important.
With all due respect to everybody who has spoken about these things,
maybe those things were spoken in a certain atmosphere
to a certain individual
towards a certain purpose.
I think it’s quite irresponsible first of all to print that in a book
and just everybody reads it,
without knowing the context of what it is,
without having gon… gone through the journey
that person who asked that question has gone through.
The question doesn’t have depth.
Answers we can give any number,
all you will do is you’ll pick up more words from today evening
and it’s not going to do anything.
If you are serious about it,
if you’re really serious about it,
if you’re serious about your journey, leave all this.
First of all, get rid of all the jargon,
all the spiritual jargon.
Just come to this much –
how much of you is sense, how much of you is nonsense?
Sit down, unprejudiced just make an evaluation,
just an accountant’s job, okay?
How much of you is – let me use the right, appropriate word –
sense and how much of you is nonsense.
Every day, sieve it out,
you will see it’s not an easy job
and ask some of you… two friends of yours and two people who don’t like you (Laughter),
also to assess you. You know,
you need a outside opinion, isn’t it?
Second opinion (Laughs) is always good.
You will see it’s a great cleansing process.
Instead of talking mukti, moksha, dissolution, sushupthi,
something else,
something else –
these are all words.
Anybody can pick up Sanskrit words, what is the point?
Let’s take
All the scriptures,
all the teachings,
all the philosophies,
all the great things that people have spoken about,
all of them are worth nothing,
compared to a single existential te… step that you took inward.
If you take one step,
it is worth more than all the scriptures in the universe put together (Applause).
Questioner: Sadhguru namaste.
You spoke about the energy, manas, chitta, ahankara and all that.
The existence of all these is the basic,
that is the body and the body is the composition of the pancha bhutas,
each one has got his own energies.
Would you kindly throw light on those five energies,
which is making us here,
speaking, listening to you and all that, please?
Sadhguru: So pancha bhutas or these are called as the maha bhutas
because these are the five elements,
which are the fundamental ingredients with which everything is made
your body is five elements,
the world is five elements,
the whole universe is five elements.
So when Adiyogi was transmitting this knowing to the seven sages,
who are today known as the saptarishis,
they wanted to know
“What is the nature of this creation,
where does it begin, where does it end?”
He was bored with them, you know?
Students can bore you
Teachers can bore you but students can bore you,
they don’t understand that.
He was just bored with them,
he said,
“All your great cosmos that you are talking about,
how big it is, where it begins, where it ends,
I can roll it all up and pack it into a mustard seed.”
That’s efficient packing,
corporate I think (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Nano.
Sadhguru: Then they wouldn’t leave there but they said,
“What is the nature of this universe?”
By now, he was too bored,
he didn’t want to waste his words,
he simply said like this (Gestures showing all the five fingers),
“Just five.”
You just have to know five, that’s all.
Not five million, just five.
Just see with five ingredients, how much mischief.
Look at the variety that’s happened in the universe.
The size and the variety and the immensity of what’s happened,
just with five
incredible or not?
Out of this five,
these four come from one.
The other four what you know as… (Talks aside: Sir, can you tell me? In… what… in Kannada, I’m not able to get the names.)
Anyway, earth, water, fire, air and space.
So, these five elements are in a certain composition in different aspects of life.
Let’s take life,
not inanimate things – even there, it is there
but – in different lives,
it is in different compositions.
In you, seventy-two percent is water,
twelve percent is earth,
six percent is air,
four percent is fire,
remaining is space.
When I say remaining,
Vinita is calculating,
“Okay, six percent akash.”
No, I said remaining is space
because we are not talking about physical entities alone,
not talking about the physical dimension alone.
So hundred percent is not the quantity.
As long as you measure the body, yes.
Once you come to akash, you’re not talking about percentages.
So what you are referring to as akash
because the word akash is being loosely used today in common language
the word akash did not mean sky,
it meant the fifth element.
Because your eyes cannot see beyond the fifth element,
only in the night you are able to see beyond that.
During the day, what you see is just the etheric sphere
and because of the way light plays on ether,
it all turns blue in your vision,
otherwise you’re just seeing
Like suppose a cloud-cover came, you’re seeing only the cloud,
that is the sky for you on that day.
You say a clear sky
no, it is a (an?) etheric sky that you’re seeing,
it’s an etheric bubble.
Beyond the atmospheric bubble, there’s an etheric bubble.
Light dissipates in a certain way, refracts in a certain way there.
Because of that, your vision closes there.
Only in the night, when there is no sunlight,
then you are seeing beyond the etheric space.
Now, akash is another dimension of perception and intelligence and existence.
So, your akash
Your water is here (Gestures),
your fire is here (Gestures),
your air is here (Gestures),
your earth is here (Gestures)
but your akash is not just here (Gestures), it’s spread.
Normally, for a person who is,
let’s say physically healthy and reasonably agile and active,
for him, his akash is somewhere between nine to eighteen inches around his body.
But if you do a little effort,
this bubble can be expanded limitlessly.
So, today, you’re looking for the iCloud.
There’s already a cloud and this cloud can be enlarged.
You can make it as large as this planet,
you can make it as large as this universe.
It is a just a question of your willingness, that’s all.
Your boundaries or how small your boundaries are,
are question of your unwillingness to transact, isn’t it?
Tch, let’s say your social boundary,
how big your social boundary is
or how small it is,
is a question of willingness and unwillingness
in terms of your social activity.
Similarly, existentially,
how willing this life (Referring to oneself) has become
or how unwilling this life (Referring to oneself) has become.
“Why would I be unwilling?” – this is the question,
you need to understand this.
Because things are packaged one inside the other,
life is made in such a way,
what you call as life is also death at the same time.
Right now, you can say, “I’m living”
or you can say, “I’m dying.”
Actually you are dying, one day it’ll be complete.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whether you call it living or dying, it’s the same thing
but we are looking at it as two different things.
The moment you look at it as two different things –
that’s why the mortality process –
the moment you look at it as two different things,
you will accept one part of it,
you will resist another part of it.
Once you resist,
if you resist death, you will not resist something the… called as death,
you will only avoid living.
Right now, tomorrow morning, you start the chant,
“I don’t want to die, I don’t want to die, I don’t want to die, I don’t want to die”
all that’ll happen is you won’t live.
Whether you’ll die or not, we don’t know but you will not live for sure (Laughter).
So because life is… is inclusive
but intellect is exclusive,
always it wants to cut and see.
What is life, what is death – there is no such thing.
They are intermingled, both are happening at the same time.
Because of this, akash,
if you are able to perceive your akash consciously,
suddenly your ability to know is just effortless.
You can have the luxury of remaining uneducated and still be okay.
You can still be okay even if you are uneducated
because everything that’s worth knowing about life is here (Gestures),
in these five elements.
So, the most fundamental aspect of the yogic process is called bhuta shuddhi.
Every yogic practice,
whatever you do,
is a little extension
or little extract from bhuta shuddhi,
which means cleansing of the elements.
If you do enough of this,
then you arrive at what is called as bhuta siddhi
that means you have some mastery over your elements.
If you have mastery over your elements,
your body will happen the way you want it,
your life will happen the way you want it,
your destiny is determined by you.
Not only that,
even things around you will happen the way you want it.
Lives around you will happen the way you want it,
plants will flower out of season,
things will happen in ways that you thought not possible.
Is this something supernatural,
is this superhuman?
No.
This is not about being superhuman,
this is about realizing being human is super (Applause).
And the nature of the five elements,
what they are,
how they function,
an enormous amount of study and science and experiential dimensions to it
has been done in this land.
Unfortunately, we are ignoring all that
and trying to handle everything on the chemical level for health and well-being,
which is a very
unfortunately, very… very rudimentary way of handling life.
When we see all this
This whole way of treating human beings with chemicals and stuff
has become relevant only because we are overpopulated and too crowded and all this.
If you were little more spread out,
if you lived in your own land,
if you lived in the jungle,
you most probably did not get any infectious diseases, okay?
Only for infectious diseases, chemical warfare is okay
but for chronic ailments,
it’s something that happening because you lost fundamental balance.
One most fundamental thing is, if one of the elements is not in tune,
this will do horrible things to you.
So, one simple way is,
in this culture, they taught you,
if you have to eat your food, first you bow down to it.
You are not saying thank you to any god, okay?
Please don’t do this.
If at all if you want to thank the… somebody,
thank that poor farmer who doesn’t eat what he grows and gives it to you (Applause).
We are not thanking any gods,
we are not looking up and saying thanks for the daily bread whatever.
We’re just bowing down to the food because
we know how you treat the food, accordingly it behaves within you.
Today, there is enormous amount of study,
which shows
For example, water
this water (Gestures) has enormous memory.
If I just as much as look at it in a certain way,
its molecular composition changes,
not the chemical composition but the molecular composition changes and it behaves differently.
Lot of experimentation has happened about this and today,
they’ve come up with something called imploding water,
where some of you might have experienced this.
Suppose you went to a waterfall
and the water that is falling with great force,
if you touch the water, it feels silky.
Have you ever noticed this?
Yes?
If it goes down two miles and then touch it, it won’t feel like that.
Only there, it feels silky because the water is imploding into itself.
Now they’ve created imploding machines,
you can implode the water and you feed this water to your plants.
With ten percent of irrigation, you can get the same results,
simply because the water is imploded.
These imploding machines, which were made in UK,
we are kind of getting them for the local farmers,
so that the water is imploded.
With minimal water ,you can grow the same crops
because just changing the molecular composition changes so much.
We’ve always known this.
This is why… Why do you think people go to a temple (Laughs)
and they are dying for that two drops of water?
Because the water is supposed to have the memory of the divine,
supposed to be in touch with the deity
and there is supposed to be memory
and you take it and it’s supposed to work,
if it… this whole science is managed properly
but today, we don’t know how it is in most of the places
but the possibility of changing the
how the water behaves within you,
just by treating it differently.
Before drinking, just bow down to the water.
Don’t see it as a commodity, it’s not a commodity,
it is life-making ingredient.
This (Gestures) is more important
than your mother, father, your children, anybody. Isn’t it so?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: What is in this vessel right now?
Please tell me I want you to hear that.
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes, because if you don’t drink it for one day, you will not want anybody (Laughter),
you want only this (Referring to water).
No, we are talking about the real thing (Laughter).
So the five elements,
if you learn to handle them properly,
simple thing,
whatever – the earth that you walk upon,
the air that you breathe,
water that you drink,
food that you eat and the sky –
three times a day consciously just (Gestures doing namaskar)
put your hands together for these things.
These are the life-making ingredients,
your life is made out of this.
Just approach it differently,
you will see your health situation,
your sense of well-being,
your stability,
everything will be greatly enhanced.
If you want to do proper practice of bhus… bhuta shuddhi,
please come, we have elaborate systems of bhuta shuddhi.
Probably nowhere else in the world right now these kinds of systems are offered
but they will need a certain amount of preparation and absolute dedication to pursue that (Applause).
Questioner: I have been seeing your videos in YouTube,
this is the first time that I am seeing you live.
So, I have a basic questions,
which will help everyone here.
Everyone talks about, you know,
knowing ourselves and the first step is going inside
and then the way to go inside is meditation and when I try to
Sadhguru: I don’t know, please don’t (Laughs)… do… I never said such things.
I don’t know which everyone said those things (Laughter).
Questioner: Okay, so then how do we go inside?
Vinita Bali: That is the question (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Inside what,
you are already inside the hall (Laughter)?
Inside what?
Questioner: Inside ourselves.
Sadhguru: Ohh (Laughs)!
Questioner: Okay, if that is the truth of the first step of knowing answers for all the questions,
if going inside is the answer,
then how do we do that?
Sadhguru: First of all, you must understand what is inside,
okay,
and what is outside.
If you do not understand what is inside and outside,
then you will go to all the wrong places.
Now what is inside?
Your body – accumulated over a period of time,
yes or no?
Hello,
Maa?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: What you accumulate can be yours, cannot be you.
Is that much clear?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whatever it may be.
What you accumulate can be yours, cannot be you.
So, this body (Gestures) is an accumulation.
What you call as my mind, the whole content of the mind is accumulated,
depending upon what you are exposed to in your life.
So your body is a heap of food,
small or big.
Your mind is a heap of impressions, again small or big.
Between these two heaps, where the hell are you?
So, inside, outside
leave these words because when it comes to language,
there is only that much leeway,
so within that,
maybe different people are trying to use it in different ways,
we don’t know in what context they used.
You put everybody into one bundle and said, “All of you said this.”
I don’t know who these all people are.
Different people employed different methods around them,
looking at the people around them,
what was best suitable for the people around them,
accordingly they would have worked most probably.
If they are genuine, they would have worked with the people around them,
not with concepts from somewhere.
What
Looking at an individual person, you will do something,
what works for that person.
What you do with this person (Gestures) may not work for another person,
you’ll have to do something else with that person
but you are talking about a generic inward, outward.
So, first determine what is inward, outward.
Everything is outward right now.
The world is outside,
body is also external material,
all the material in the mind also is external
so what is this inward you are talking about?
Then you will immediately say
atma, paramatma, soul, this one.
Now you are going into belief system.
You don’t know!
You know you have a body,
yes?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Please check your neighbors (Laughter).
You know you have a body,
you believe you have a mind (Laughter).
But to some extent, you know
but rest is belief.
Yes or no?
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Sadhguru: I’m not questioning whether it’s true or false,
let’s not go there at all, but it’s belief,
it’s not yet in your experience.
If you talk about something, which is not yet in your experience,
to put it bluntly,
you’re just a bloody liar,
that’s what it means.
But because lies are holy,
lies are written in scriptures,
lies are repeated by all kinds of people who dressed in different ways,
which are supposed be holy though ridiculous.
Because of this,
you are not supposed to question these words.
Anywhere you go, first thing is people say,
“Sadhguru, what about the soul?”
I ask them, “Which sole, right or left”?
So, let’s not te… talk about something that is not in your experience.
Right now, your body is in your experience to some extent,
your mind is in your experience to some extent,
rest you don’t know but we can infer.
If I have to accumulate this much (Gestures) body,
if I have to accumulate this much (Gestures) mind,
something more fundamental must be there,
yes?
Something more fundamental must be there,
we don’t know what the hell it is.
For now, we will call it “you.”
How you will go into yourself, I’m asking (Laughter)?
You can go into this hall,
you can go out of this hall?
How will you go into yourself, I’m asking? Tch,
saying let’s leave this, this is not the way.
You do this way.
What is not you, all those things you keep it aside.
Before today
if you
before you go to bed, everything that’s not you, keep it aside.
They may be precious to you. You think about it,
your house, is it you? “Oh! My house” (Gestures) (Laughter).
All right, you have lots of passion about it but all right, keep it aside.
Your husband, is it you? No, that’s easy, “He is not me” (Laughter/Applause).
My children are… is the… are they me?
Oh, little difficulty, but no (Laughter), tch, they are not me.
They’re beginning to tell you – if they’re twelve,
they’ve already told you (Laughter).
So, the clothes that you wear, is that you?
No.
The body that you wear, is that you?
No.
All these thoughts and emotion, is this you?
No.
Everything that’s not you, keep it in one heap,
not physically, just do this mentally.
Keep everything aside, let me see.
Every day, you practice this.
One day, when you successfully keep everything aside that you are not,
what you are will be there (Applause).
We have too many ideas about things that we’ve not seen,
this is a big problem.
Shankaran Pillai went to Britannia (Laughter/Applause).
Can I…?
Vinita Bali: You love the story, yes.
Sadhguru: Shankaran Pillai went to Britannia Industries (Laughter) to find a job, to find a job.
So, they were looking for a really smart,
farseeing sales manager.
So they asked him one question,
“Which is further (farther?), Mumbai or moon?”
Shankaran Pillai thought, he said, “Mumbai.”
They said, “What?
Mumbai is further than the moon?”
He said, “Yes.”
“How?”
“Well, I can see the moon, I can’t see Mumbai” (Laughter and Applause).
So what I am saying is
if you go by your present perception,
you’ll get all the wrong conclusions.
So don’t be in a rush to make conclusions.
Let’s pay little more attention.
You are a worthwhile life,
which deserves some attention, isn’t it?
Don’t seek other people’s attention (Laughter).
Your own attention,
doesn’t this life (Referring to oneself) deserve attention?
Pay attention to this (Referring to oneself).
Enough attention, everything will be clear.
Everything about you, you’re asking me.
If I tell you, what do you have? You have some more words.
Tch, some more words you have,
that will not get you anywhere near the truth.
One more word or ten more words doesn’t get you any closer to reality,
just you’ll have more things to say to somebody else.
This kind of hearsay is spreading in the world.
Everybody knows where god is,
who his wife is,
how many children he has,
when is his birthday,
his address.
In every bhajan, people are singing his address,
where he is and how to get him
but they don’t know a damn thing about themselves.
This kind of, what to say,
a very knowledgeable ignorance is dangerous (Laughter), you know?
If you do not know, it’s not a problem.
If I see, “I do not know,”
the possibility of knowing is always there, isn’t it?
If I do not know and I think I know,
then I’ve destroyed all possibilities.
So, we have arrived at many things,
we know
In every culture they know what is the nature of god,
where he resides,
how the ambience is there and the works, you know?
Tch, you
Everybody knows the geography of the heaven, isn’t it?
Don’t you?
but you don’t know a damn thing about yourself.
It’s time,
it’s time we paid attention because
everything you know, you know it only the way it’s projected in the firmament of your mind.
You don’t know anything any other way.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So, what you need to fix is
you are seeing everything in a mirror of your mind
and the mirror is wonky.
First fix it,
first thing is to make it stable,
flat,
proper plain mirror,
so that you see everything the way it is.
Does the plain mirror show you everything the way it is?
Everything reverse, you know?
Then you’ll have to flip it, that’ll take much more skill,
most people can’t flip a dosa (Laughter).
Now to flip the whole universe,
the whole life that is reflecting in your mind,
to flip it over without shattering it into pieces will take much more.
But the first thing is to level out the mirror so that
it shows you everything the way it is, not some other way.
Right now, everything is seen depending upon how you are identified with something.
Every identity has distorted the mirror of your mind
and it shows you things in completely different way than the way it is.
First thing is stop talking about things that you do not know
no soul, no atman, no paramatman, no god, no divine, no heaven
talk about something that you know
and then the longing to take the next step will become strong.
Otherwise, when you know the geography of the heaven,
what is the need to pay attention to anything?
Very dangerous (Laughs).
Thank you very much (Applause).
Vinita Bali: Thank you very much, thank you. Thank you, Sadhguru.

Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
This is Vishnu from Coimbatore.
How would you define India?
Sadhguru: India is a
It's like a kaleidoscope.
It's a conscious chaos.
At one time,
we consciously created some chaos
intentionally.
But unfortunately,
some people are overdoing it today.
They made it their profession to create chaos (Laughter).
We need to handle that.
But why this conscious chaos is
because we understood organization in a different way.
If you step out of this hotel,
you will see a manicured garden.
But every day,
ten people are working on it to keep it that way.
Three months, if nobody attended to that,
there’ll be no garden left.
But you come into the jungle,
you come into the forest
there is a different kind of organization and order there,
which million years later,
it will still be there
without any maintenance.
So something that lasts a million years,
is it better organized?
Something that cannot last even a month
without maintenance is better organized?
So we organized this culture
with a certain element of conscious chaos.
But today,
because your education systems are totally Westernized,
which is all straight lines,
you’re trying to fit India into these straight lines.
It will not fit,
you will only be frustrated.
And in trying to fix that,
you will destroy the nation.
We need to understand,
we have allowed a certain room for chaos
so that it's an evolving process,
it is not a fixed thing,
it is not ruled by commandments.
There is nowhere in this country,
where there has been given a moral code to you.
There is nowhere in this country,
where they told you,
“This is god and if you go to him,
all problems will be solved.”
There is no such thing.
There is no a god.
First of all,
there is no the god in this country.
There is no the heaven in this country.
Everybody can create their own, tch, you know.
We are given the freedom to create our own gods.
Out of this came the technologies of god-making.
We created thirty-three million gods and goddesses
because there is no certainty.
The idea of a kaleidoscope is wonder,
seeking.
So we have always been a land of seekers,
not a land of believers.
Now, you’re trying to become land of believers.
I see, we believe something.
No (Laughs).
Every day… Everybody
these days are saying,
“We believe, we believe”
because they are trying to bring a Westernized idea of organization.
You must understand,
all the violence,
all the nonsense,
all the most horrendous things that happen on this planet
is always in terms of
one man’s belief versus another man’s belief.
So we never believed anything.
Even if god came and spoke,
we questioned him, isn't it?
This is the nature of this culture.
Everywhere else, if god spoke,
they said, “This is it, this is the commandment.”
In this country, if god came and spoke,
we still debated with him,
we questioned him.
Unless it's logically correct, we did not accept it.
This has been the ethos of this culture.
This causes a certain amount of chaos,
but this chaos is evolution of human consciousness too.
Every culture has been created
because of its geographical conditions.
Because of certain survival factors
and other historical events that happen in that place,
culture gets shaped.
We also have some element of that.
But a large element of this
this culture is about consciously seeking
what is beyond all this.
Because of this,
in this culture,
god, heaven were never important things.
Our highest ideal is mukti,
or liberation,
or freedom.
Freedom has always been the highest goal,
not god,
because we know even if we go to heaven
and sit next to god,
in three days we’ll get bored with him also (Laughter).
Yes,
we will, isn't it?
And what
Do you have any proof that you’re not already in heaven
and messing it up (Laughter)?
I’m asking, do you have proof?
You don’t have proof.
Maybe you are in heaven
and you’re messing it completely.
Yes, that’s the reality,
I’m telling you (Both laugh) (Applause).
Sadhguru: What is a temple?
Let’s understand this.
Generally when we utter the word temple,
immediately people are thinking of which religion?
No
if temple belongs to you or me or to a particular group,
you cannot call it a temple.
Temple is an invitation to the divine.
If we can setup a space
and the necessary tools,
where divine is more manifest
not that it is not there everywhere
it’s just that more experiential.
There is sound waves everywhere, you
but you cannot hear it.
You need a cellphone to catch the transmission,
otherwise you can’t catch it.
So we can say ‘A temple is a larger cell phone.’
You can't talk,
just to listen -
one way cell phone. Is that okay?
I always set it up… set up the temple in such a way
that you can’t yap.
Is that okay
or you want to talk?
If you want to listen to a dimension beyond,
if you want to be receptive to that possibility,
we can create a space like that
we can create a device or a tool like that.
When I use the word ‘Tool’,
there seems to be a certain sense of lack of reverence in me,
but I particularly use the word ‘Tool.’
When I refer to the Dhyanalinga as a tool,
people feel offended,
“Sadhguru, don’t say that.
In our experience, it’s everything.
Don’t call it a tool.”
I say, “It’s a tool”
because the word tool means that which works.
It is not a piece of art that you can just appreciate.
It's a tool because it works.
If I
see, this just one screw in the door,
if I ask you to unscrew it with your hands,
can you do it?
But if I give you a screwdriver,
you can do that, isn’t it?
Similarly, to open the doors of the beyond,
there is a tool.
With your own hands if you try to unscrew
that simple screw in the… in the door,
all your ten nails will go but still it’ll not come.
Yes?
You can try with your teeth.
You know, people do.
When they have no tools, they’ll try their hands.
If it doesn’t work
don’t you do?
You may lose your teeth, still it may not come,
but if you had a simple tool,
how easily you could do it?
So, this is a tool to open the doors to the beyond
and I don’t think
a tool is irreverential
nor do I think a tool is insulting.
A tool is a tremendous possibility, isn’t it?
The significant development in human society has happened
only when we started making tools, isn’t it?
No?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Why is it offensive if I say a temple is a tool?
A temple is a tool.
There’re different ways of using different tools.
For this tool,
you have to be in a certain mood
because this is not a physical tool,
you have to approach it in a certain way.
So, that certain way may also include
a certain level of reverence
because that attitude is needed to be able to use that tool.
So, it’s very important that
it is understood and used as a tool
not as a destination, but just as a possibility.
A temple is not a destination.
A temple is only a doorway.
A doorway is not a destination.
A doorway is just a doorway
opens up something.
So, what does it take to build a temple?
Of course we need some stone and many other material
but what does it take within a human being to build a temple?
Why I am telling you all this is
I am trying to discourage you.
A temple will not happen
unless at least a band of people… at least
a handful of people hold it above their own life
not as a part of their life,
not as a side thing that they do in their life.
Temple building is not a hobby or a profession.
You have to see it as something beyond your life,
more important than your life.
You must understand at least in the East,
in India,
temples were built so elaborately.
Some of the temples took three to four generations to complete.
For example, the Kailash temple in Ajanta/Ellora
in the… in the Ajanta area in Maharashtra.
There’re many in Tamil Nadu.
This temple was carved out of the rock.
They did not build it.
A huge mountain of a rock,
they carved the temple into it -
three floors, all carved out.
They must have re…removed hundreds of tons of stone,
probably thousands of tons of stone
because all the empty space that you see in the temple
has been carved out
and they made three storeys
Elaborate, you know,
decorations and
there are at least about six hundred statues
all carved out.
If you make one mistake,
you have to rebuild the whole temple.
Yes.
Because it’s not built,
it’s not something you can take it off
and put something.
It is carved into the rock.
It took one hundred thirty five years
at least four generations of people
working to the same plan.
three to four generations of people
working to the same plan for one hundred and thirty five years
to complete the temple
and nowhere their names are written
such phenomenal work.
Many of them must have started working at fourteen, fifteen years of age
and would have… they would have died there,
okay doing the work,
but nobody’s name is written.
Architects… Architects’ name is not written.
The kings who’ve sponsored the temple,
their names are not written.
That’s a temple, you understand?
It’s not a place for us to leave a footprint of who we are.
The very beautiful story
There was an old man
There was a man.
Men get old
slowly.
He had two sons.
Father and two sons worked hard,
built a big farm
they became prosperous
Then for the old man, time to die came.
When he was going away,
he told his two sons,
“Whatever comes out of this land,
both of you should share equally
and you must always keep it up.
At no point,
there should be any dispute between the two of you.”
They agreed in front of their father and they kept to it.
I am saying not dividing the land.
Dividing the land has come only in the last four to five generations in India
maybe three to four generations.
Before that, there was no such thing as
‘This is my land, this is your land.’
Only the produce was divided, never the land.
So, conceptually it was not there in people’s minds
that you can actually divide the land.
So he said, ‘you must divide the produce equally’
and they stuck to it.
After some time, one of the brothers got married.
One, two, three, four, five
five children he had.
The other one never got married.
So, he was alone
but still the crop was shared fifty-fifty
because those are the father’s words, you can’t change it.
That’s his wish.
So, the brother who was married and had five children
one day a worm entered into his mind.
You know sometimes worms get into your mind?
A worm entered his mind
and then a thought arose and he thought
‘I have a wife and five children,
I get fifty percent.
My brother is alone by himself and he gets fifty percent.
When I grow old,
my sons will grow up, five of them.
They will claim more land,
we will become more prosperous
and we will have much more
but my brother is alone.
When he gets old, he will have only fifty percent of what we have now.
This is not fair
but he is so proud.
If I try to give him little more, he will not take it.
If I try to share my produce from the new lands that my sons have broken,
he will not take it.
Only from the father’s land, he will take fifty percent.
So what to do?’
So in the night,
when everybody is asleep,
he carries a bag of grain
and takes it and puts it into the… his brother’s store.
So, it
unknowingly he is donating to his brother.
The other brother, who is alone, thought
‘My brother has a wife and five children.
He needs more.
I am just alone,
what will I do with all these?
But if I try to offer anything, he will not take.’
So, he started carrying grains and dropping it into his brother’s store.
Reverse osmosis was happening
and nobody knew.
In the night quietly once in a way,
this brother puts one bag, that brother puts another bag.
This went on.
They became old.
One day, two old men were carrying sacks of grain in the night
and they came and they faced each other.
Both of them realized what’s been happening,
but they looked away and continued their journey,
put the sack and went back.
Then they died after some time.
The townsfolk were wanting to build a temple.
They were looking for a site.
They went to many places.
After much looking,
they decided to build the temple
where these two brothers met on that night,
they looked at each other
and suddenly they were so embarrassed of their own generosity.
They looked the other way and continued their job.
They thought ‘This is the best place to build the temple’
because that’s what a temple means
that looking beyond yourself.
If that is not there,
there is no temple.
Prasoon Joshi: There are few people who go through this life support.
Now, what do you call that?
Is that a period the person is there,
and also when you’re
you’re talking about samadhi and
and unconscious dying.
You know, one has seen in India
there was a way people used to leave the place and go to a
a place like Kashi and will die
the preparation for death.
And in… in today’s context how do you see that
the preparation for death or drying
dying gracefully or going somewhere else.
Please… And, sort of two questions
one is about life support.
What is the state of life in the life support?
Sadhguru: See, the business of the doctors and the medical science should be to help the living.
It's not for them to enter the realm of death.
As you said it's life support, not prevention of death, okay?
So somewhere this line must be drawn.
It would be fantastic if you can train medical professionals to be able to see when it is not so,
but that would be a dangerous things because misuse will happen.
People will pull the plug on people who can't pay the bill
or whom they don’t like, you know (Laughs)?
Things will happen.
So because of that we are just allowing it to go whichever way it goes
because if you touch it all the consequences of it you cannot control.
So you support the life only with the hope
that it will recover and once again be back to life.
There is
Nobody is supporting it with the intention that you just want to put it on the machine then run it forever.
The hope is because a few have come back after years of comatose
and the people who love them and the families they are hoping against hope
that this person will come back and
maybe a doctor is trying to assist that.
Sometimes it goes to absurd levels because
nobody can take the call, tch.
Nobody is able to take the call
because nobody is authorized to take the call as such.
So because of that it goes to certain levels.
But life support is only with the hope they will bounce back.
Now, if you observe a person in comatose
there are two types of people
with… One type of people the body is refusing to respond
but their mind and emotion is active, this is torture.
Prasoon Joshi: Sadhguru, this is not exactly true.
Sometime the family, the people, the doctors together,
all of them somehow almost sure and I’ve seen such situations
that the guy, the person is not going to come back
but there is a kind of human consciousness,
a kind of guilt,
a kind of responsibility,
a kind of love keeps the person in that state.
What I wanted you to, you know, throw light on is
is - what is the state of this life at that point?
With this
Because the life is not manifesting itself through this body
and neither it has taken,
if you talk about rebirth or reincarnation
an… an… another life,
it has not done that. So where… What is the state of this life?
Sadhguru: Above all these things that you mention there is a law.
If you pull the plug there is a law for that.
And that’s what I was coming to
there are two conditions in this.
In one condition the body has become inert that you are not able to get the body going
but the one who is within - the mind is active, emotion is active, all perceptions are there –
this is torture because the body is refusing to move.
But there’re other kinds of situations –
the body seems to be reasonably vibrant and active, digest food,
everything is happening but inside it's become blank.
If inside has become blank,
if you wait for five cycles of twenty-one days
then for sure life is gone
but body can be still kept alive.
Because of various medical processes you’re keeping it going.
Body may not dwindle because body is still strong –
without a life you’re just keeping a body alive.
This is like an empty shell but shell is kept alive.
This is not a good thing to do
but if the person inside is alive but the body has gone blank,
now it's a very difficult decision for anybody to take.
And for all you know many times all the things that you’re talking
whether to pull the plug, not to pull the plug,
all this the person understands.
It's… It's a very bad situation.
It shouldn’t happen to anybody but when it happens how to deal with it?
There is no particular way because it's individual sensitivities.
Just because the pody… the body cannot get up and the person understands everything,
feels everything, you can't cut him up
pulling the plug is as good as cutting up, you know?
So this is a hard decision to take -
there is no particular way to do it
but if only the body is vibrant but inside has gone totally blank –
twenty-one… five cycles of twenty-one days you can wait.
After that very comfortably you can pull the plug,
for one hundred percent it's gone.
Prasoon Joshi: And Sadhguru, then what is your take on euthanasia
or where do you… Because here I’m… I’m also going to come to… to
to the will
how much of will this life has and how much is it left to others.
Your… your point about euthanasia?
Sadhguru: In my opinion nobody has a right to hold a opinion on euthanasia
because it's your opinion,
you’re not making a judgment.
It's not an informed judgment, it is an opinion.
As I said, if life is gone but only body is there you can pull the plug,
but still for the people around,
including the doctor and the relatives and whoever that person means something to them,
they see the body is good, the heart is beating good,
all the parameters are good –
why would they want to pull the plug?
You cannot tell them to pull the plug because they think it's on.
So I don’t think
Prasoon Joshi: So if it was left with an individual then if he
he wants to willingly give up life
Sadhguru: But the problem he’s not in a state to say that.
He might have said it before
Prasoon Joshi: Suppose he’s in a state to say that – so that brings to a suicide.
So do you think he has the will and… and
and the right to… to exercise that?
Sadhguru: See the simple thing that we did in this country is,
if an individual decided,
those who do not have the capability to smoothly exit this body,
without causing any damage to it,
those who did not have this,
they always walked away into the forest and just sat under a tree.
After some time, without eating, they would just go.
This is the normal vanaprastha.
You’ve heard in Mahabharath all these Kunti,
all the Dhritarashtr and even the Doordarshan guy Sanjaya.
All these people went into the forest.
to live on dry leaf and this and that for some time and slowly dwindle the body and exit.
The body begins to understand.
All the creatures – most creatures do this.
You must see how a cobra dies.
It's unfortunate that no documentation about these things have been done.
If a cobra realizes it's time to die it will go up to some place
where it will not be eaten by predators and things.
Usually it’ll ci…climb… climb up a tree and sit on one branch.
And it just sits on the branch and that’s it.
In about twenty to twenty-five days it will die.
Because the cobra can easily exist - its normal meal itself is spaced out somewhere between eleven to fifteen days.
Because of that,
beyond twenty - twenty-five days, thirty days it will die.
So it will simply sit without eating and slowly dry up just like that.
Even a creature, a crawling creature like that, has this much awareness.
This would be the best way to do,
but even if I talk about it today the so-called modern society which eats five meals a day
they will be terribly upset
and they won't let me into America because they eat twelve meals a day
Everybody’s recommending this
So this has been the normal process.
If you’re not a yogi, if you do not know how to exit,
you come to a place, you sit quietly by yourself.
If your relatives are around they won't let you do that,
they will stuff food into you, you know.
Because our idea of love is to stuff the people with as much as we can
So they won't let you do those things.
That’s why people went to some place,
sat in a place where the energies are good
because being in a positive, live energy space is important because
to be without food becomes very effortless if the outside energy is conducive and supportive.
If the outside energy is little depressive,
you will see you will need lot more food and the compulsions of food are strong within you.
So this is a way
but you can't suggest that to modern life.
They will, you know

Sadhguru: When you say, “I’m turning spiritual”
you must understand, yoga is the methodology
essentially, your effort is
to move away from the ways of the body
and get aligned with the… another dimension of nature within us.
From the surface nature of physicality,
we want to get aligned with a deeper nature of inner nature.
One important aspect of your physicality is your genetics.
So, life repeats itself.
You think you are a fresh life (Laughs)
do not underestimate the dead (Laughs).
Your great-grandfather laughing at you,
living through you.
You know, someone said,
“Leave the dead to the dead.”
You’ve forgotten?
2000 years ago, someone said,
“Leave the dead to the dead.”
It’s not that simple to put the dead to rest.
Just because you boxed them and buried them,
or, you’re a Indian person, you don’t trust boxes and burial (Laughter),
you know they could find a way out (Laughter),
so you burned the hell out of them (Laughter).
Not only you burned them,
you took their ashes
and put it in three different rivers (Laughter)
and also in the ocean (Laughter),
so that they should never again rise (Laughter).
Indians are taking a lot of care about these things (Few laugh)
because there is a whole science
as to how to make sure the dead remain dead
they don’t play up.
They will play up.
In so many ways, they’re playing up.
To put them to rest
The best way to put them to rest is,
there is a distance between you and your body
they’re finished.
Only if you’re identified with your body,
they will play up in your life
in a hundred different ways.
Many of you will notice this
when you’re eighteen, twenty,
you thought, “I’m never going to be my… like my mother or my father.
I’m a revolution!” You know?
All the hippies, I’m asking you (Laughter).
But you’re forty- five,
suddenly you start talking like your mother or your father,
you sit like that,
you stand like that,
you seem to amble around just like that.
Slowly, they’re taking charge of you from within.
Everything that you resisted,
you thought you are a big revolution (Laughs)
just because you smoked pot (Laughter).
But (Laughs) forty, fifty years of age,
slowly they start manifesting themselves,
laughing at your revolution (Laughs)
because putting the dead to the dead is not a simple thing.
So can we do this?
Definitely.
The entire system of yoga,
from the simplest process to the most sophisticated processes of yoga,
essentially designed towards this,
so that you become a totally fresh life.
Nothing of the past should remain.
We have great regard and respect for the past because
they brought us this far,
but we don’t want them to carry them
we don’t want to carry them into tomorrow.
We want to leave them there.
We understand they are our foundation,
but we don’t want them to (be?) the flower and fruit of future.
We want this to be a fresh life.
It will not come just because mentally you rebel.
Genetically, you have to distance yourself.
In India
These days it’s becoming weak,
but otherwise in Indian families,
it's very, very important to perform these karmas to the dead.
People think
this is in remembrance of their forefathers.
This is not in remembrance.
This is to distance yourself,
constant effort to put them away
because they’ll keep cropping up.
Not somewhere else –
right here within you.
In so many ways, they keep cropping up.
Putting the dead to complete rest means,
in a way, you’re liberated,
because the cycles of the past are over with you.
You are a completely fresh blossoming.
Shekhar: …As children… you’ve often talked about education
as children are we in a wrong system of education that leads us to be
much more involved with the mind and the intellectual pursuit and
rather than looking for the larger experience that you’re talking about?
Sadhguru: Largely there’s no education in the world.
There are ancillary units,
supplying cogs to the main machine.
Human beings are like fuel for a larger machine that we have created.
You call it the economic engine,
you call it the social things
See, the immediate needs of a society has to be attended to;
sometimes we have to do it.
But to what extent?
The fundamental goal of education is to enhance human perception;
that is the only goal.
But today education means they made an accountant out of you.
I am sure you were a bad one.
Shekhar: I was terrible. (Laughter)
But I managed to convince people I was good.
In my own self I knew I was terrible.
Sadhguru: So what I’m saying is we are trying to make something for something,
something that we think is useful.
In the larger scheme of things, as life,
you becoming an accountant,
you becoming an engineer,
you becoming a doctor, whatever else, is not of great importance.
Socially right now maybe there is an immediate need for somebody to keep accounts.
We need some accountants.
We can teach somebody a bit of accounts,
but we don’t have to go on producing millions of accountants and lawyers and engineers,
but today’s society we built like this, it’s a must, okay?
But in the real sense of term,
as a piece of life,
what is relevant to this life
your education is nowhere near that!
Education is telling you your life is not important,
you have to serve this society.
What is a society?
It’s just an assembly of people.
But no, people are not important, society is important.
Where is the society?
I don’t see any society anywhere.
I see this man and this man and this woman and this woman.
I don’t see any society.
I see only individual human beings.
But people see a society, because they got a word in their mind.
I don’t have words in my mind. When I look at people, I just look at people.
Can you make all of them one? (Laughs)
Each one is a unique creature by himself.
So the very nature of life is such –
every life –
whether it’s an earthworm or a gross… grasshopper or this tree or this blade of grass,
just anything,
it’s only longing is to find its full potential.
And that’s all it should be –
that human being should find their full potential as a life.
Today we want to fight a war, we will make everybody into a soldier.
Tomorrow we have a lot of sick people, we’ll make everybody into a doctor.
Tomorrow accounts,
day-after-tomorrow everybody is quarrelling, so everybody is a lawyer (Laughs).
What I am saying is we are trying to make life serve something else.
No,
the highest manifestation here is life and life itself.
Everything else, all social structures are here to assist and serve that.
Unfortunately today we are enslaving life to serve social structures.
No.
Social structures must be made in such a way that they will serve life,
an individual life, not social life.
And education is a fundamental tool,
but education is twisted in such a way.
All education on the planet, if you ask me, is fascist,
because it’s all about enslaving people to serve the needs of whatever a few people are thinking.
They’re not even thinking straight, they don’t even know.
They are also slaves of the same system.
Sadhguru: All yogic practices,
it doesn’t matter what you’re doing,
whether you do asana, yama, niyama, pranayama, asana, whatever
dharana, dhyana, samadhi, shoonya,
whatever you may be doing,
essentially all of it is coming from the fundamentals of bootha suddhi
or cleansing the elements
or if you cannot cleanse,
if you’re such a hopeless case,
transcending the elements.
Vibhuthi – that’s why,
beyond the elements.
If you cleanse the elements
you’ll live a wonderful life.
If you are beyond that,
the best thing is to transcend,
forget about living a beautiful life
just transcend the life
because living a beautiful life is a more complex situation
than transcending.
Transcending means you’re beyond it.
What's beyond is not bothered by so many complexities of the physicality.
But if you want to be in the physical and still above that
then it takes little more mastery over the physical.
If you have no mastery over the physical
you will get enslaved to the physical.
So bootha suddhi essentially means
you want to first cleanse it
so that slowly you come to a state
which we call as bootha siddhi
that means you have mastery over the elements.
Everybody has some kind of capability with the elements
otherwise you wouldn’t even live a normal life.
Right now how well organized the five elements are in your system
decides how firm and stable and organically strong this body is.
It's just - body is a play of five elements,
so is the world,
so is the universe.
Everything is a play of five elements.
In these five
unless you want to explore mystical dimensions
you don’t have to bother about the space.
So there’re only four.
Among the four
seventytwo percent of your body is just water.
Just shake and see,
you’re just a water-bottle,
three-fourth full, you know.
You need to understand
it is in sync with the planet;
approximately seventy-two percent of the planet is water.
Do you know this?
Yes,
that is how life is evolved.
Whichever way the nature of the planet
is manifested in your body many many different ways.
So about two-thirds of the planet is water,
two-thirds of the body is water.
So when you eat food,
you must always eat food
where the water content in the food is over seventy percent.
This one thing the western societies are ignoring
and paying a huge price.
Now everywhere it's becoming like that,
if you eat any vegetable it will be over seventy percent water.
If you eat a fruit it’ll over ninety percent water.
If you want cleansing to happen you must eat fruit.
If you just want to maintain the body as it is,
vegetable does this.
Almost any Asian cooking usually has over seventy percent water naturally.
That’s how traditions created it;
they were aware of it.
It's only western diets which are dry.
You drink water,
it doesn’t work like that.
The food should have over seventy percent water content.
So seventy-two percent is water.
Another twelve percent is earth,
you know only twelve percent of your body is actually earth,
largely it is water. So it's eighty-four percent.
Another six percent is air;
air is the easiest thing to manage and take charge of
because there is breath
and you can take charge of it in a certain way.
Another four percent is fire.
Taking mastery over fire could do many things to you
but because you are house-holders living in family situation,
you don’t have to take charge of fire.
You can keep it as it is;
sometimes you can burn somebody a bit.
You need it right? You’re married
Once in a way if you don’t burn them a bit,
it may not work.
Yes or no?
The remaining six percent is space;
you don’t have to bother about that
unless you want to explore mystical dimensions of the existence.
To live well four elements is enough,
fifth one is not relevant for people who just want to live well.
Taking charge of this,
there’s a whole system of practices –
some are direct,
others are round about.
Bootha Suddhi can be practiced in a most simplistic way
or in an highly sophisticated way.
Taking charge of the elements is in many ways.
One thing is how you consume these …elements,
how you treat these elements –
the whole system of ancient cultures
were about treating the four elements right.
The four elements are the basis of your creation.
If you have some,
even a minor mastery over it,
you will start living in ways that other people think
it's magical.
Nothing magical because
right now you drink water;
see how it is, does it look like you?
Does it look like you? Hmm?
Does it look like you?
Is it resemble like any of you?
But if you drink this it becomes you, isn't it?
Isn’t this magical?
This itself …life itself is magical.
There’s nothing in life which is not magical, isn't it?
Just your some disease got cured,
that is not the miracle.
Look at this, this becomes you
this is a phenomenal miracle, isn't it?
Once you’re capable of performing this miracle,
you should be capable of many other minor things –
fixing an ailment or do on the,
you know damage…you damaged something, fixing it all these things would be possible because
you are creating the whole body from inside, isn't it?
Using the four elements you are creating a whole body;
unfortunately it's happening unconsciously that's all.
So bringing consciousness to
how these four elements are becoming human body –
when I say human body
from this water you’re manufacturing a highly sophisticated mechanism, isn't it?
Yes or no?
What this amounts to is,
if I just pour this water on the floor
it became I-pad;
what would you call that?
Suppose this glass of water I poured it down
and there this water became I-pad,
what you call that?
Miracle, isn't it?
The same thing I drink this, this becomes I.
This is not a miracle?
I was
in the same trip and I came to de Gaulle airport
and there was a grumpy looking security man.
Hhe asked, ‘Any fluids?’
I said like this.
He got irritated;
he looked at me like this
then he put my bag there, ‘computer!’
I said like this.
He burst out laughing.
We’re too impressed with what's happening around us,
what's happening within us is too big, isn't it?
Yes?
All computers are a small manifestation of this, isn't it?
We are enamored with that
but not enamored with this.
That is our problem.
So looking inward itself is bootha suddhi.
If that’s not possible for you
there are simple processes.
There are practices,
there are rituals,
there are elaborate systems as to how to take charge of elements
or if you don't know how to do it;
somebody can perform something from which everybody can benefit.
There are bootha suddhi rituals,
for example every month
there is Pancha Bootha Aradhana happening in the Dhyanalinga.
You don't know how to do it;
somebody else will do it.
You just sit there in the presence and benefit from that.
(Sadhguru): Shiva's love for Sati was like I was just now telling,
when we were in the Kailash trip
people became weepy about what they missed.
They didn't miss anything,
but they felt they missed.
So it’s one of those moments when you yield.
So Shiva's love for Sati is just like that –
it's one of those moments where he gave in
to the ways of emotion and to the ways of life.
That was not an eventual happening in his life,
that was just a small happening in his life.
It is his silence which is of utmost significance to us.
It is his silence which is of greatest value to us,
not his romance,
not his marriage,
not his wife's death –
not these things.
But how to talk about his silence? (Laughs)
There is no way to talk about his silence.
now that you have brought up the question. (Laughs)
Yes,
he went through all the throes of
romance and the death and the grief and the works.
But the moment he set it down, he simply sat there still, unmoved,
as if nothing had ever happened to him… nothing...
nothing had happened to him at all.
And in fact nothing had happened to him,
and nothing happens to anybody for that matter.
It is just that because
our psychological and emotional structures are such that
it is designed for us to enjoy the juice of life.
But unfortunately most people don't drink the juice of life,
they drown in the juice of life.
So Shiva also allowed himself that luxury from some moment.
When he thought it's enough,
he came out of it and sat there completely conscious
and in a different state.
So don't ever think that was the eventual happening.
That was just a small happening in his life and that was fine.
That made him kind of more human friendly
because people could relate to him
because he also grieved. (Laughs)
That gives some joy to all the people who are in different levels of misery,
that Shiva also suffered for a certain period of time.
But you need to understand it's just one of those moments
when he has given into the process of life.
But the moment he wants to stop it, he stops it immediately
and sits there untouched by any of these things.
I
Was just
Talking to somebody who's some kind of an expert on the internet and stuff. I said what's happening because I?
Don't get to see anything except a bit of nails and our own work
all the time I
Never get to browse or see anything so I was asking what are people looking for what is it?
And he's saying it like it's a matter of fact. He's saying that it was 70% his only pornography
70% of
The Internet traffic is pornography. I don't know if this percentage is correct, but if it's anywhere near that I
Mean what's happened to us
When such a powerful medium that we can communicate with the entire world don't we have anything better to say
I'm not trying to be moralistic and said this is wrong
That is wrong, but I am saying for the first time
In the history of humanity we have this capability
That we can
Say something to the entire world in one shot
Never before this was even imaginable. Isn't it I?
Want you to understand you just taken it for granted your whatever?
Instagrams and what's apps and Twitter's and emails don't take it for granted. This is the first time?
That we can communicate
to every human being on the planet
Is it not important the highest possibilities get to them?
Today
the three
biggest industries on the planet are the first number-one industries arms and armaments
Number two is alcohol and tobacco put together
Number three is for Monsieur tickles
This says everything about us. What kind of people we are isn't it and
On the Internet is pornography
We as a generation should not let this opportunity pass we should not let these
Sex maniacs
Child sellers to dominate this world
How can we allow people who sell children to do dirty things with them to dominate this planet?
Tell me we are allowing them to do it
We don't have to fight them everybody thinks we have to fight no we have to overwhelm them with positive things
You
Devi Shetty: About twenty years ago Sadhguru,
I received a cheque for one lakh rupees
from a retired major from Indian army.
He just gave his name,
he refused to
he didn’t give his address
and he wrote a small note
stating that
“The money I’m giving you is too small
for the path you have chosen.
But God has his own mysterious ways of giving you the rest.”
It had a tremendous impact in what I thought,
what I wanted to do.
Is it because there is something called cosmic forces
which are constantly trying to help society and doing
or it’s something else
which is influencing people to do something
which is beyond their means?
Sadhguru: See, the ideas of something wants to help,
something reaches out to you
I was
I happened to be in… in about four weeks ago
I was in Los Angeles
and I was staying with some people there.
And the bedroom was full of books,
so I just picked up one of these books and saw.
The author is saying the core of the universe is love.
Why would the core of the universe be love?
because this thing has been always told to people
“From heaven God loves you…”
all these people.
See if you were having a roaring love affair right now
with somebody next to you here,
will you look up and ask for… rays of love to come towards you? (Devi Shetty Laughs)
I’m asking you?
No.
You’ve made yourself in such a way nobody can love you (Few Laugh).
Now only God can love you (Laughter).
If you say God loves me,
you must know you are such a pathetic despicable case (Laughter).
If you made yourself in such a way,
nobody can help loving you,
you are a wonderful human being, isn’t it?
So when it
we need to understand,
there is something called human thought and emotion,
human needs of… emotional needs of love, care, touch, this.
The cosmos or what you are referring to as the source of creation,
or divine
or if you want to use the word God,
because God personifies thing
we will refuse to use that word.
Let us say whatever is the source of creation,
which we are referring to as God generally,
by religious this thing
essentially it is just an intelligence
which is simply exploding into everything possible.
If you are in rhythm with it,
you will rise.
If you are not in rhythm with it,
it will crush you.
It has no love,
it has no compassion,
it has no intention of helping you,
it has no intention of harming you,
it has no nothing.
If you understand the forces and ride it,
you have a fantastic life.
If you do not understand, it will crush you.
You’ve seen people doing surf boarding on the waves in the ocean.
It is such a magical thing,
just riding the waves.
But if you don’t do it right,
if you go into the waves,
it’s like being in a concrete mixer.
It will just do that and it will kill you.
So one rides the wave,
another gets crushed by the wave, that is all that’s happening.
The rest is all human interpretations.
This is the first thing we have to stop -
that we do not extend our thought and emotion to the existence.
This is relevant between you and me.
This is relevant between you and your family members
you love them, I love you, you love me, all this fine.
Don’t look up at the sky and say “I love you”, (Few Laugh))
it will not say “I love you” back (Few Laugh)
because it has no such need.
It’s pure existence.
This is what you have to become.
If you sit here, you are a complete existence by yourself.
This is a full-fledged life.
It does not need anything from anybody.
It has everything.
It is connected with everything in the universe.
It does not need anything.
But we want to play our games okay
we can do all this stuff.
But you need to understand
right now we are trying to extend our compulsions to the whole creation.
It doesn’t work like that.
Existence is not trying to help you.
You may be in tune with it (Snaps fingers), bingo you are.
Whether you got in tune with it consciously or unconsciously,
somehow you got in tune.
That’s why Shankara said
Yogarathova, Bhogarathova -
that means somehow you do it, I don’t care.
Shankara… Adi Shankara went to the extent of
somehow you do it,
you get it man, that’s important. (Laughter)
How you get it, who cares (Few Laugh).
Sadhguru: You’re talking about actual intolerance
or the debate that’s happening
If you’re talking about actual intolerance,
if you’re talking about intolerance in this country,
obviously you’ve never traveled outside this country.
You don’t know
how the rest of the world is.
This is the only country left on the planet,
where everybody can do what they want to do
and say what they want to say
1.25 billion people,
we have our share of nutcases,
of course
Every country has,
we have our share.
At least… You must understand this –
In this country, we have every kind of people –
presidents, prime ministers, cricket captains.
Anybody can be anybody according to their talent
or their capability
or their ability to be there for one reason or the other.
What I am saying is,
this is all I think
See, I am not a fan of any particular political leader
or a party, for that matter.
But all I am saying is
six hundred million people are still hungry in this country.
Today,
you may go home and may have a choice of what to eat.
There are six hundred million people,
who have to choose whether to eat or not to eat, okay?
When this is the condition,
when a government gets elected –
maybe I didn’t vote,
I voted for somebody,
somebody elected somebody,
majority of the people elected a government
once they elect them,
next five years, everybody shut up and support the government,
whoever it is
It’s… It’s not about
It’s not about who got elected.
Whoever got elected, five years, just shut up
and support that government in every possible way.
If you’re interested,
if you have some humanity in you,
just go around in this country and see,
the whole goddamn country is a slum.
Yes or no?
It’s not just in cities, the entire country is a slum,
believe me.
They neither have water nor toilet nor anything nor anything, okay?
When the condition of the country is like this,
you have time to talk about all these things,
it’s a shame
It’s not about intolerance, intolerance
it’s lack of humanity in you.
Doesn’t matter who,
we must understand, democracy means
it’s the rule of institutions.
Once you elect someone –
this’s an electoral institution –
once you elect somebody,
you elected the devil, it doesn’t matter,
just support the devil next five years.
This is what democracy means.
‘I don’t like him, so I will pull him down,’
this is rubbish.
When the people of the country elect somebody, just shut up, isn’t it?
If all of us don’t learn this,
this is not a question of tolerance, intolerance.
It just smacks of lack of humanity in us
because such a large mass of people
still have not have fulfilled their fundamentals.
What are we talking, sitting here in cities?
Just walk around in the villages and see
what is the condition of life there.
Intolerance!
I am very intolerant of this
Shekhar: Sadhguru, a lot of what you’ve said,
you’ve related it to
what modern world is doing to us
in the way it’s teaching us,
in the way we are behaving
Sadhguru: No, no, I’m… I’m not really
See, there is no such thing as modern world and ancient world, okay?
At every time in society
there is a certain set of people who are trapped in their own logic.
And they think anything outside that as… that is insane;
Every generation thought
somebody was modern,
somebody was conservative,
somebody was, you know, liberal,
somebody was conservative, like this.
No generation has not had that division.
So I am not truly saying modern in that sense.
Every society has that.
Okay, let me say prudes and not so prudish people.
So being prudery people are thinking
in terms of
somebody is restrained in his thought and action.
I am saying the moment you employ your intellect,
you’re super-restrained.
Silly things people think right now,
very silly things –
socially, internationally
people think they’re profound things
because you have a constipated … intelligence
and over-used intellect.
When we say intelligence,
now this little plant which produces a fragrant flower,
you’re discounting that intelligence.
There is more intelligence in the air around you
than in your brains.
Yes.
There is more memory in the air around you than in your brains.
There is more memory in the epithelial cell of your body
than in your brain.
This is a fact.
Shekhar: So the question I was going to ask was –
I wasn’t born to be trapped by my intellect,
because
it’s… it’s a tough question for me,
it’s like what you’re saying is you’re trapped by your intellect,
and I agree with you
because a large part of our… our questions to ourselves is just,
you know, circus within the mind.
The mind asks, the mind answers, the mind doubts, the mind asks, the mind answers –
I wasn’t born like that.
But what you’re saying that is
Are you saying that is not the natural way to be?
And if it’s not the natural way to be –
why did I become like that?
Sadhguru: Because there is no such thing as human nature.
Being a human being means it’s a flux.
For all other creatures on this planet,
nature has drawn two lines.
Within that band, they must live.
For a human being,
only one line – the bottom line; there’s no top line.
So there’s no description of what is a proper human being;
there’s no definition like that.
Everybody thinks everybody else is wrong, isn’t it? (Laughs)
Shekhar: Yeah.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Because there is no definition
that ‘this is what a good human being is.’
People are always trying to arrive at it
but when you impose the definition
all you will get is
rebellion from many, many places.
Every generation tries to arrive at what is a good human being
and the next generation comes and says,
‘That’s rubbish!
That’s not what… the way we want to be’,
and they want to be some other way,
just to beat this –
the trap of that,
and they create a new trap.
A new trap looks like freedom,
because it’s a new place.
After some time you know the pain of that
and then you want to create a new one.
I’m talking about employing your intelligence
without the limitation of your intellect.
The human existence is a phenomenal intelligence.
See, right now you’re here –
you can’t do it with your thought.
You can’t conduct your breath with your thought.
You can’t beat your heart with your thought.
You can’t make your kidneys and liver work with your thought,
can you?
They’re way beyond your percep… your thinking process, isn’t it?
So I am saying
your thought is useful only for certain aspects of life.
The thing is you’re taking it beyond its ambit
and making it look stupid.
It is not stupid – it’s a wonderful process!
The significance of being human
One of the significances of being human is
we’re capable of thought
and conscious thought.
It’s wonderful!
But a foot-scale is wonderful if you’re measuring your height,
but not for the ocean;
it’s a wrong thing, that’s all.
Nothing wrong with a foot-scale;
it’s very useful.
If you’re a tailor, it’s useful.
If you’re a mason, it’s useful.
For so many things it’s useful,
but if you’re an oceanographer,
don’t go with a foot-scale,
you’re going to waste your time and life
and come with wrong conclusions.
You’re trying to use your intellect beyond its ambit, that’s all.
So you will end up coming to conclusions.
Rather than perceiving,
you’re arriving at conclusions and thinking that is true.
Whatever conclusions you make
have nothing to do with reality.
You’re making conclusions with the limited data of information
that you have gathered.
It doesn’t matter if you’ve eaten the libraries of the planet,
still what you have with you
compared to what the Existence is,
what the Creation is,
it is just a miniscule of knowledge!
With this knowledge you don’t try to make a conclusion –
it’s bound to be wrong.
Maybe you earned a PhD in a University (Laughs),
but you cannot know truth like that,
you cannot know the nature of Existence like that.
So the best way is to open a window and simply look;
you see at least one dimension of life the way it is,
not the way you think it is.
Because the way you think
is essentially dependent upon the limited data
that you have gathered in your brain,
in the memory system, rather.
Juhi Chawla: But, Sadhguruji,
suppose we say this to the common man,
who has a little house
Sadhguru: Where did you meet a common man?
Juhi Chawla:(Laughs). I’m imagining it,
that you know,
they have so many chores to do in a day
Sadhguru: No, what I’m, saying is
every… every man or woman think they’re special, believe me
Juhi Chawla: Oh yes.
Sadhguru: Yes.
So where did you meet a common man, I’m asking (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Oh!
I will come to this as well actually.
I want to ask you this.
Now, I’m talking about a household
where people have to literally go to work every day,
to pay their rents, you know
children have to be educated,
food has to be on the table.
They are busy morning to night –
they go to office,
maybe their boss is not pleasant with them,
they come home – maybe they have a little tiff with their wife,
the children have their own little wants and you know demands
and… Dealing with so much,
how can they keep reminding themselves that you know
it’s all in my mind and I have to be
Sadhguru: No, no, no, first they have to know this,
these are all the things
these are all not punishment imposed upon them
these are all the things that they always wanted.
They wanted a job and they got it.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: They wanted a wife or a husband, they got it.
They wanted children, they got it.
They wanted a car in which they’re stuck in the traffic jam (Laughter),
okay.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: I’m saying these are all things that they wanted.
So they must understand,
if their dreams come true, they are a big mess (Laughter/Applause).
Juhi Chawla: Yes, actually I have heard this–
“Be careful what you ask for,
because you might get it” and yes we’ve all got it.
Sadhguru: So they’re complaining about things that have worked in their life (Laughter).
Sadhguru: you know right looking at the world
Questioner: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: You look at the man’s life.
These men can be inspiration for any human being, isn’t it?
As an inspiration, yes.
So, when you say religion,
every religion is somewhere around one human being, isn’t it?
Except the Hindu way of life.
It’s not around any human being.
It is, it is… it is handled in a totally different way
but all other religions are around one human being. Isn’t it so?
So, that one human being,
people are using him as an inspiration.
What we need is not Christians,
what we need is not Hindus,
what we need is not Muslims.
If we can bring an element of Krishna or Jesus or Buddha into people’s lives,
that would be wonderful, isn’t it?
But the problem is we have too many
quarreling Hindus, quarreling Muslims and quarreling Christians;
that’s the problem.
If you could take these men as an inspiration
and bring a little bit of there life into your life,
life would be very different, isn’t it?
It would be very, very different.
But we have not done that;
we have only identified ourselves with this group or that group,
we have joined the party.
This party or that party we have joined and invariably we quarrel.
Are they an inspiration?
Definitely they are an inspiration for any human being, isn’t it?
And it would be best that we align them from those religions.
Really, you don’t see Krishna as Hindu,
because he was not Hindu.
You don’t see Jesus as Christian because he knew nothing about Christianity.
Yes?
So, if you align them from that religion
and just look at them as men,
definitely they are fantastic men.
They are an inspiration for any human being, isn’t it?
Questioner: They were undercover yogis?
Sadhguru: They are cover blown, that’s why they got crucified.
They couldn’t stay under cover
and they were not clever enough to create more undercover yogis.
All their covers blew that’s why they got crucified.
If they have kept it under cover they wouldn’t have been crucified, isn’t it?
They couldn’t keep it under cover
for whatever reasons.
Sadhguru: It's truly unfortunate that
we are dividing the human species
on gender bias,
but it might have become necessary now
because of centuries of exploitation that’s been heaped up
on the woman in different societies in different forms,
because we created very exploitative societies.
When human societies are fashioned like this,
naturally the male will rule.
When strife is the way of the human society,
naturally the male will rule
simply because of the physical prowess of the masculine.
A society can be created on equal keel
only when we establish a certain stability in the social structure,
when survival is not the pinnacle of life,
survival is just a small part of our life.
Only when civilizations are well-established in a way
where art, music, aesthetics are as important
as economics, defense and other aspects which rule the society today,
only then a woman will find her rightful place in a society,
as masculine brings one type of value to human life,
feminine brings another type of value to our lives.
Unless we are able to see that both these values are equally important in our lives,
there will be no true equality or justice or
you cannot say a civilization exists,
So if intelligence,
sensitivity,
perception are the most valued aspects of life,
then only gender equality will come.
What is needed now
is to bring to the awareness of the masculine
that feminine is an equally important part of life.
The media,
education systems
and other social setups must strive to do this
that our lives will not be beautiful
just because we make so much money,
just because we build this or that;
our lives have to become beautiful means
the feminine,
the aspect of the feminine has to be around us,
only then everything will be beautiful.
What we refer to as masculine and feminine are two fundamental qualities in nature.
It's got nothing to do with the gender.
There may be men who embody the feminine qualities much more than most women.
There may be women who embody the masculine much better than most men.
It is important that a society begins to recognize this
that one’s body may be either female or male,
but one’s quality may be feminine or masculine
or a combination of both.
This is a nation,
this is a culture where
inward-looking is one of the most significant aspects of our lives.
Because of this inward looking
If you look inward deep enough,
you will see you
every individual whether you are in a male body or in a female body,
the masculine and the feminine exists in equal proportions within you
and hence even our gods are represented like this
Shiva is shown as the Ardhanaari,
he is a half man - half woman
but I think it's time we name this day as the
‘Day of the Feminine’
rather than ‘Women’s Day’
because it's important that the feminine comes forth
and plays in the world.
So on this day of the feminine,
I am taking the liberty of renaming it
instead of being a Women’s Day, let this be a Day of the Feminine.
This is a culture which has worshiped the feminine for thousands of years.
It is important that
we must bring that spiritual ethos in our cultures
where every human being
his life and his experience of life is not limited to the physical body.
He sees life as something more than the physical.
He experiences life beyond the physicality of who he is,
because the gender is of the physical nature.
If your experience is beyond the physical nature,
gender will be just a minor issue in your life.
There are many, many things
or many many levels in which
the exploitation of the women has to be stopped by law
I think generally we have stopped it,
but in reality,
in social reality is yet to happen.
So it doesn’t really need a fight on the street,
it needs a proper enforcement of law,
but if a proper enforcement of law has to happen,
a conducive social situation has to happen
and that conducive social situation is not going to happen
unless there is widespread dissemination of knowledge
in the form of education and the economic possibility.
If these two things happen,
I don’t think women will have to fight for their freedom.
They will be free anyway.
Sadhguru: You are evolving. (Laughter)
you must help your parents to evolve
because for an Indian person,
I want you to understand,
the only reason why parents desperately want to have a son is
because they believed that you’ll facilitate their liberation.
You know this?
Do you know this?
Why?
You don't know this?
Why they want to have a son is, when you die,
only your son will be there to set fire to you.
He will do the karmas,
he will do the kriyas.
It's important
because the girl gets married and goes away somewhere.
See, today it's different,
wherever she is, she will come back today if she… if you die. (Laughter)
I didn’t mean… (Laughs)
At least if you die, she’ll come back,
but in those days if the girl got married and went to a faraway place,
that’s literally the end of it.
You rarely see her, okay?
She is not going to come because you die
because you can't keep the body if she’s going to walk
two hundred kilometers from somewhere
and walk and come,
she’ll take five days and she will not come.
She will
There’ll nobody to do the things that are necessary.
So always having a son was most important.
He will be around;
if you die
he will do the necessary things
so that your liberation will happen.
So in pursuit of liberation unknowingly they bore you.
Now it's time you remind them.
This is an important duty for a child.
As your parents are aging
and if they don’t have the sense to come to their senses
you must bring sense to them.
You must remind them like I just now reminded you,
you’re one year closer to the grave –
your parents are much closer than you, isn't it?
I mean it's a fact of life.
If you miss this one fact, you’ll live a silly life, isn't it?
Yes or no?
If you miss this one fact,
you are going to live an extremely stupid life.
So, as your birthday gift,
you must remind them it's time they looked inward.
They want you to
They don’t mind you being drunk,
they don’t mind you being lost
but they are afraid if you take a spiritual step you may not turn back,
but they’re right on that. (Laughter)
It is not that you won't go home.
You will go home
but they won't have the same bondage from you as they knew.
They don’t have their hooks on you,
suddenly you’re free.
That’s something that nobody can tolerate.
Please understand this. (Laughs)
When I am bound you are free,
I cannot tolerate this.
When I am bound you should also be bound
because I’m bound to you;
why you’re not bound to me?
So this is the whole game.
So as a son,
this is one of your most important duties,
to remind your parents
that in their life it is important -
they’ve done whatever they knew best till now –
it is time that they turn inward,
it is time they invested some time and energy
upon their own inner well-being
because if they don’t do this one thing,
they will die miserably for sure.
Yes.
If you have not found anything beyond the physical,
when the moment of death comes,
terror is the only way;
you have no other choice, isn't it?
You don’t want your parents to die in terror;
you want them to die gracefully, isn't it?
No?
So, you must turn inward.
They must
You must make sure they turn inward
you
Danone so good, huh Murder no
Milana mother
Murder None Karuna
lever Shoddy
Circle um Karuna
Samaya dipper and aquila
Good afternoon everybody the excellencies and ladies and gentlemen thank you for being good
afternoon Sorrow and good afternoon to your excellencies and distinguished guests and
To all the meditators who are watching on the internet right now?
I'm so grateful to be here and and it's such a privilege really to be here. My name is Maxwell Kennedy and
I've been I learned how to meditate from Sadhguru a Few years ago, so we're here at the united nations and
their Forts maybe 40 or 60 ambassadors here in 70 different countries and
7,000 people and we're here to talk about sustainable development
So why did you start with a chant?
The chant is an invocation an invocation means
to perform different types of activities
We need to have our energies in different ways
otherwise
Most people have become competent in one way or the other but if you ask them to do something totally different
They will find themselves totally at Loss
This is simply because their energies get
Directed in one way only an invocation means
You kind of make yourself malleable in such a way that for every different type of action you need your energies in different
parts of your system, and you are able to graduate that
Calibrate that in such a way to perform that specific activity
So when I sit here what we need to do is different from what I was doing when I was walking down here
so this is just calibration using sounds if we have to know the meaning it's
Talking about how birth is sweetness, but death is compassion so relief
we may think that is a terrible thing but
Aren't we glad that some day? We will die suppose. We could not die that would be terrible isn't it?
suppose we can't die at all and
Above all it is talking about yoga in the sense
The chant is describing yoga as a way of transcending time when we said transcending time
Right now we have a sense of time only because we are so identified with our physical nature
Suppose we did not have a body we would would not have any sense of time our bodies keeping time
Everything that is time is cyclical
But yoga is a dimension which wants to transcend which helps you to transcend these cycles and make a Journey Beyond
Cyclically nature of life, which is the nature of physical existence?
Thank you um I
Had a teacher at Harvard who was a medical doctor
And he told me a story that when he was a young doctor he went down to Mississippi
and he saw children there in the United states as in the
MiD-1960s who were starving and
after that trip he went to Washington DC and
He had he tried to meet a group of senators
and he went to one after the other and none of them would talk to him and
On Sunday afternoon. He got my father's phone number at home
My father is senator Robert f kennedy and my sister Carrie who runs the Robert f kennedy memorial he's here right now in my wife
Vicki so but he got my dad's number and he called and
And it was Sunday my dad's with the children and and and he said to him are well alright
why don't you come over and we'll talk and
After they spoke my Dad went to Mississippi
To where this doctor had gone, and when he came back
He wrote this. He said these words and there are others on
The backroads of Mississippi where thousands of children slowly starved their lives away
their minds damaged Beyond repair by the age of four or five in the camps of the migrant workers a
Half-million Nomads virtually unprotected by collective bargaining or social security minimum wage or Workman's compensation
exposed to the Capra's of Fate and the crew of their fellow, man alike and
On Indian reservations where the unemployment rate is 80% and where suicide is not a philosopher's question
but the leading cause of death among young people
So after that trip my father went back to the senate
And he worked with a group of others and they created the first food stamps program in the United States
and that is kind of the development model that I'm used to so when I look at the
Sustainable development goals of the United Nations my immediate reaction is to think are the Addis Ababa
Accords going to fund this or not
But you have a different approach. Can you talk about yoga in that context?
so when we say sustainable
Development goals, we are talking about?
human Wellbeing
addressing Human Wellbeing as
17 different issues Which Concerns poverty
nourishment health women's issues environment this kind of things
Essentially, we're talking about him and well-being
How can you transform the world without transforming individual human beings?
This is the effort that's going on in the world for a long time. We want to transform the world
But we are not aiming at individual human beings
The World is just a word
It is just you and me if there is no transformation in you and me if there is no change in the way we perceive
Experience, and we think feel and act in this world, how can you change the world?
So we can pump in money. We can have projects
They will all go up and go down
But only if we transform individual human beings on a large scale only then there will be true transformation
This is why yoga becomes a significant thing today?
The United nations taking this taking up this international yoga day is a very important step
I would say it's a revolutionary approach
because without
transforming individual human beings you cannot really transform the world because there is no such thing as
in reality in reality
There's just you me and someone else if all of us change the world has changed if we refuse to change
We will be only talking about it
I've been to any number of international peace conferences and everybody is talking about world peace in one of these
conferences where there were 17
Nobel laureates, I asked him a simple question
Is it is it true that all of you are?
Truly peaceful human beings can you put your hand on your heart and say I am peaceful?
They admitted no Sadhguru. We don't know how to be peaceful, but we want the world peaceful. How is it possible?
What what you see is the world is just a larger manifestation of who we are?
Sadhguru you can see all around the world in brazil in the united states in La where I live people are doing yoga and
when we're doing it, we're I'm stretching out my body and
Trying to control my breathing
Can can you explain what yoga really is and how that can help?
attain the sdgs
so this fundamental human longing
for health for
Wellbeing for
fulfillment of life
when you find a
Logically correct and scientifically ascertainable way, then we say this is yoga
Yoga means
In search in pursuit of human wellbeing we've been doing all kinds of things we've been looking up for a long time
which has led to
humanity being divided in the name of
religion scarce creeds in so many different ways
now in the last 50 years I would say we are looking out seriously and
We are ripping the planet apart
All the environmental degradation that we are talking about is just in pursuit of human wellbeing
in the last hundred years
Definitely. We are the most comfortable generation ever
But we cannot say we are well
Because we hit not really well people are not happy people are not peaceful
That is not happening because we have not at rest in nature, so when it when you address it in a scientific Manner
rather than by Belief by Philosophy by
Ideologies you address human well-being in a scientific way, this is yoga
the word Yoga literally means union when we say union what we're talking about is we are talking about a
scientific way of obliterating your the boundaries of your individuality
When I say a scientific way of obliterating the boundaries of your individual nature what this means is
Right now as we sit here. This is me that is you distinctly clear, but we are breathing the same air
We are we are a product of the same Earth
What you call as myself is just a pop up on this planet and it will pop out
But in this little bit of time, we have divided this in such a way that we can't meet
Yoga means you obliterate
This individual boundaries not intellectually not by belief not by ideology, but as a living experience
Will be launched. I mean this was there in the video. We launched a very large-scale
environmental project in Southern India
the fundamental for this came from this
this happened to me when I was in the university and
recently about eight years ago when I when I happened to be in my hometown and
After a very long time one of my english teachers came up to me and said now
I understand why you would not let me teach Robert frost I said ma'am
Why would I not let you teach Robert frost I like Robert frost
She said don't you remember you didn't let me teach frost then I remembered
She came one day till then we were reading only English Poets
She came and introduced the American Poet and she said Robert frost is a great man, and then she started off woods are lovely dark
and deep I said stop I
Said a man who calls a tree a wood I don't want to listen to this guy
she
She said no, no this is a very great point. I said I don't care how great. He is he calls tree a wood I
Don't want to listen to him
then when we wanted to start this
Process in Southern India when we found that rivers were going dry and the groundwater was sinking very rapidly
When I decided we will plant 114 million trees in Tamil, Nadu
The simple thing that we did was I took thousands of people made them sit in the trees
And we set up a yogic process with which they experienced that what they are breathing out
The trees are inhaling what the trees are exhaling they're inhaling and they realized one half of the lungs is hanging out there
Once they realize this there is no stopping
Even today millions of trees are being planted on a yearly basis all done by common people
Simply because we brought this yogic experience to them that they truly
Realized that one half of their breathing apparatus is actually out there not here
So bringing this experience into people that what you think as myself is not
Within the boundaries of your physical nature it goes well beyond that if this becomes a living reality
Then fulfilling these goals that united nations has for the world is
Becomes much more possible than the way it is right now where we are trying to push in one way
but a whole lot of people are pushing in the opposite direction because they don't even see it as -
Thank you, sir, guru I wanted to
Point out this incredible thing about the tree planting project is that sud Guru?
insisted that the trees be planted on small plots of land less than half an acre and
Half of the trees are fruit trees
And then half of them can be used for firewood so that the people who live on these lands are
benefited from them they take care of the trees and those trees actually really grow and
one of the things that that's really working on is is Poverty and
when I look at the world today, and I see
especially in the United States this
Incredible gap between people who have capital and people who don't and
I it's a it's a very disturbing sign to me that this the gap between rich and poor
Can you talk a little bit about how yoga would address that in terms of sustainable development?
Civilians to understand this that we have chosen it cannot an economic model. Which is all about everybody for himself or herself
There is no larger commitment to humanity as such because that is market economy
Everybody does according to their own
Capabilities and skills and grab what they can grab it's literally
shootings good economy, but we have gone for this simply because
the
socialistic communistic
Ideas have unfortunately failed not necessarily because they're bad because human beings are not ready for it yet
that is
Poor people who had nothing wanted to share the rich never wanted to share
So it became a joke in the world if the rich had to if rich had the consciousness to share
Communism would have been a great idea
But the poor want to share rich don't want to share so that is the same situation here
And this is the same situation building up everywhere else in the world
This is the best way to run the world no, but do we have a better idea
No, so who because right now. We are in that place. So the only thing that we can truly do is
That we bring. What is this what we are referring to as yoga as a living experience
yoga does not mean twisting your body
Yoga does not mean standing on your head yoga does not mean holding your breath
yoga means in some way you have transcended the limitations of your physical nature you are beginning to experience life as a
Larger possibility not just this physical form that you are once this becomes a living experience
Sharing and living together we become a common experience everywhere
Does it mean we are going to start communes and everybody will live together no we can run
Businesses in a more inclusive way we can create a more inclusive
Economic model and this need not be done by government policy this can be done by Private individuals
Because there are companies which are almost as large as nations today
There are companies which budgets which are bigger than nations, so it is very much possible
That business can be run in a more inclusive way right now
We are thinking only of profit our idea of profit is very
Short-term kind of idea
if you really want to run your company if you are thinking in terms of your company prospering in the next 100
200 500 years continuously
Then it's very important that you make your customer your partner that you make everybody else in the society your partner
Whatever you are manufacturing or whatever you're selling or whatever the business sees
Whether you're selling a safety pin or a computer or a spacecraft
Essentially the business is about human well-being
if this is
this comes into the consciousness of every business person if this comes into the consciousness of building every business that
Essentially this is about human wellbeing. We do it in so many ways, but fundamentally
It's about that if this awareness and consciousness is instilled in the businesses on the planet
Then you can find the capitalistic way of living need not mean disparity can mean well-being to everybody
Sadhguru I read the other day that
that for every dollar in government investment
That in developing countries that there's $7.00 now in private investment
so
How do we use Yoga to?
Yoke in the the private corporations that are looking just at their bottom line to end up really having development
that's fair and just
in the last 20 years I have
largely focused on the business leaders because
There was a time a few hundred years ago where the most influential leadership on the planet was religious leadership?
later on when the military machines
Built up in a big way the military leaders dominated the world in the last hundred years
Democratically elected leaders have become the most dominant force in the next 15 to 25 years
You will see the business leaders will be the most important or influential leadership on the planet
the good thing about business is that a
Businessman is willing to make a deal if the deal is good no matter who you are
I'm saying the old prejudice of I cannot make a deal with somebody is going away, and they're willing to make a deal now
Anything is sustainable only if it is beneficial to both the parties
Nothing can be sustained either in the marketplace or in marriage unless it's beneficial to both the parties
Only when it's truly beneficial to both the parties this can be sustained
This is slowly sinking into the business leadership. I have seen in the last 20 years
Prominent business leaders their way of thinking is very very different than what it was
My essential work has been to move individual leaders from their personal ambitions to a larger vision
because a larger vision means
then the business is
Sustainable for a long period of time if it's just your personal ambition the world will work against you if you have a larger vision
The world will work with you. This is a big difference
So this is something that is slowly sinking and you will see if you see annual meetings of major
Businesses what they're talking if you look at the world economic forum if you look at various economic
You know assemblies on the planet you will see they're all
Beginning to talk about a larger vision how to make a difference rather than how to make a profit
This is become the language of the business these days it still has to manifest in a big way
But at least the language has changed from profit to making a difference
Thank you, Sadhguru when you look at societies all across the world there. There's a huge gap between
What's available to women and what's available to men?
the
sustainable development goals address this how
What's the role of Gender equality in yoga?
the Yoga means transcending your physical nature on one level
If you transcend your physical nature where is the question of being a male or a female?
You being a male or a female is relevant only in a few spaces in your life in bathrooms and bedrooms
Rest of the places I don't see why you should recognize somebody as a man or a woman
Why are we identifying people with reproductive organs if you must use a body part at least use the brain
I
think a
Small gender difference that is there between us to fulfill a certain aspect of our life is being stretched too far I
Think this is from another period Where it was not possible for a woman to participate?
because of variety of physical situations in the world
And that is largely leveled today in most parts of the world and it's rapidly changing everywhere. I would say
I think a more active effort is needed at least by law in most nations it is 100 percent equal
By practice there is still
Discrepancies which has to be worked at I feel it's a generational thing
once the older generation moves out the anger generation is not looking at it that way anymore at least I see that in all the
Asian countries it is only people beyond 60 years of age who think on in this mode the
Younger people are not thinking that way anymore
so grow
I'm just going to ask you one more question because I want to save time for the audience
Who've been waiting to talk to you and I?
can you
Tell about how you conceived the world in 30 years
What I see is for the first time for the very first time in the history of humanity
Human intellect is sparking like never before
More people in the planet today can think for themselves than ever before in the history of this
human existence
So once human intellect begins to spark like this
Unless something is logically correct and scientifically verifiable
It will fail in future you may be willing to listen to a few things
But your children are not going to listen to anything that does not make sense to them it does not matter
From what authority it comes from or in other words. We are moving into an era
where
Authority cannot be the truth
Truth will be the only authority in future. We are getting there because ever buddy is beginning to ask
Questions, and people are not afraid to ask questions anymore, so this is bound to happen once this happens
human
Aspiration for wellbeing has to have a logically correct and scientifically ascertainable
Methodology, and it's a matter of tremendous
importance that today the International yoga day has been
Declared in the last one year it was mooted by the prime minister
But it was almost like the world was waiting for it as they mentioned
177 Countries never before
In the history of United nations all of them agreed upon one thing as they agreed upon yoga
It looked like they were waiting for it. Yes, the world has been waiting for a scientific and a logically correct
Solution for Human Wellbeing the aspiration for Human Wellbeing will not stop
Unless we provide a proper scientifically structured
Methodology
Than people in terms of well-being will move towards chemicals
This is a deep a grave concern in the world the number of people moving towards alcohol and drugs in the last 25 years
Must be maybe 500 2,000 percent more than what it was 25 years ago
This is mainly because in pursuit of human Wellbeing
There are no logically correct answers to their questions
That is the reason why human beings are seeking these kind of solutions
Unless we provide this
This is a natural progression. I see in the next 30 years to 50 years there will be a big moment towards a
Scientific process for inner well-being and this is the right time to be here at this
forum and
This yoga becoming a worldwide thing we must understand yoga is not an Indian thing
If you want to call yoga, Indian, then you must call gravity European, okay?
because yes it it originated from that place because
India is one place where for a Few, Millennia. We had
uninterrupted time to look deep in words and
To look at the human mechanism in at most profoundness as to how this functions. What is the ultimate?
possibility within this human mechanism, this is taken a few
Millennia to Understand and arrive at this possibility and
Yoga I want this message to go the science of yoga is not just about health
It's not just about fitness it is an ultimate solution for every aspect of human existence
There is different types of yoga's yoga can be taught in different
dimensions the Ultimate possibility of
Raising Beyond our physical nature the ultimate possibility of knowing life in its fullest way
the Word Yoga means Union the word yoga means
one who has
experienced this union, we
Need not 1 to 5 yogi's we need millions of them who have a sense of union with the rest of the universe
particularly those who hold
Responsible positions in the world they must come to this experience because leadership
Essentially means you have the privilege of touching other people's lives
What you think what you feel when what you do every single thought emotion and action
Either makes or breaks people's lives. That's what leadership means
when you are given such a privilege
It's very very important that you are in a state of yoga that you experience life around you as yourself
if we if any of us feel the work
That we are doing is important the first and foremost thing is we must work upon ourselves
It gives me deep honor and pleasure to first give the floor to
undersecretary general
Ambassador bejoy, nambiar who will also be delivering a message on behalf of the secretary-General, Mr.. Ban Ki-moon
I shall just be delivering the message of the secretary-General
On Tomorrow's international day of yoga
Yoga is an ancient physical mental and spiritual practice that
Originated in India and is now practiced in various forms around the world
The word Yoga derives from Sanskrit and means to join to or to unite
symbolizing the Union of body and consciousness
Yoga balances body and soul physical health and Mental well-being it promotes
How many among people and between ourselves in the natural world?
Recognizing its universal appeal the United nations general Assembly proclaimed
21st june as the International day of yoga
This Year's observance of the international day of yoga highlights the important role
healthy living plays in the realization of the sustainable development goals
adopted last year by all 193
United Nations member States as
Exercise Yoga has multiple benefits
physical inactivity is linked with a number of non communicable diseases such as cancer diabetes and
Cardiovascular diseases which are among the leading causes of illness and death worldwide by improving Fitness
Teaching us how to breathe correctly and working to diminish stress yoga can help to cultivate?
healthier
lifestyles
practicing yoga can also help raise awareness of our role as
Consumers of the Planet's resources and as individuals with a duty to respect and live in peace with our neighbors
All these elements are essential to building a sustainable future of dignity and opportunity
for all on
The international day of Yoga tomorrow. I urge everyone to embrace healthier choices and lifestyles
to commit to unity with our fellow human beings regardless of ethnicity
Faith age Gender Identity or sexual orientation
Let us celebrate this day and every day as members of one human family sharing one common
precious home
Thank you
May I now give the floor to the permanent representative of Bangladesh sir?
We deeply appreciate the Indian government's initiative to have the international day of yoga
We have learnt a lot from the yoga Masters
Especially the perspective as to how yoga can contribute in the attainment of global peace
sustainable future and in turn the realization of the sdgs
What I understand without peace of mind and harmony in the body, how can we think we can change the world?
First we have to change our own world
By which what I mean is how we leave?
breathe eat
Think and aspire if we are not fit for the purpose of contributing to sustainable peace in the world
We will remain as bystanders and not as active
Agents of change I can share my own story with my colleagues and others present here
I had been suffering from a very bad bout of sciatica problem for the last two months at times the pain was
Debilitating I have gone through serious pain medication followed by physical therapy and acupuncture
In fact I am just coming here from my sixth session of acupuncture treatment I
Realized that I suffered this problem
Because of accumulated lifestyle related problems which included long hours of sitting standing
stress from the work and also from the family for the Constant change of places of Postings Etc
During the last eight weeks of my ordeal I reflected on my life and future course of action
I read a lot and search the internet for answers
And I finally came to the conclusion that yoga is the answer to my situation
Although I did some yoga in my college days my biggest mistake was I that I discontinued that
Perhaps if I continued I would have never faced my present predicament
Now the Bhujangasana or Cobra position
which is also known as McKenzie something is critical for the health of my spine there are many other essence or
Positions which can help me get my strength back as I feel a little better and able to practice those
The essence will not only help gain my physical strength
But it will contribute to my mental strength through the meditational aspects of yoga
I thought I'll share my most recent experience
So that others like me in similar Lifestyle situations can also learn and prevent the situation that I am in
Let's do yoga every day and not just one day in the year. Thank you
May I no offer the floor to the distinguished permanent representative of Georgia excellency. I was thinking about asking
Questions, but in fact it's not as much as asking questions
but how what you told us echoes in in all of us and
It really does it really does because what we what we take from here
From all this wonderful conversation that that we just had is how
Complex things are indeed very simple
if we
indeed try to
as A
person who is really honored and humbled to be here as a representative of my country who was one of the
177 who co-sponsored
Yoga International day
I'm an also a practitioner rather a very bad student to the school that I'm
attending
That school is called yoga in Daily life. Which is in United states in many parts of Eastern Europe particularly
headquartered in Rajasthan in Katou
Led by Vishwa Guru Sri Swami Maharaja Nanda Ji and what I learned from my
Personal experience because after all the oneness is sharing this personal experiences also is
What patanjali said that it's about?
Having your mind free of disturbances, and if we indeed attain to be free of disturbances
we find peace with our mind that can really transcend and
somehow start this chain reaction of
Peacefulness and oneness that we all long for particularly in in this
organization
I'm glad that we have so many colleagues by now or calling from
Bangladesh my good friend who sits next to me is also
Avid yoga
Practitioner and many and it is indeed
Probably high time what you just mentioned when prime minister of India?
Said that we needed
international day of Yoga it came in date on the right right time and I'm glad that I was here on the right moment and
Right time thank you for your presence here
Thank you for your blessing and indeed if we try to I think we can really attain that
We are without disturbance
And we find this oneness and unity and we take those
17 goals one by one and I really hope to and I'm looking forward to that day where we will no longer have this beautiful
poster
Behind you because we will have that
Completed because sdg is in a way to me is
somehow
Manifestation of our common failure too that we have to talk about as DG's
But it's good that we are starting to talk about it
And we are making it happen hopefully and I believe in that yoga will create that
That will permeate our work in this organization in this chamber and other words. Thank you very much on Shanti
Okay, now open the floor to the distinguished permanent
Representative of liechtenstein excellency you have the floor I came from the probably most non
Spiritual angle possible to yoga I was essentially dragged against my will 17 years ago
by a den girlfriend into yoga class and
You know I viewed myself as this
big soccer player and cyclist and all these other things and thought really this is not for me and
To my credit I had to say already after the class well, there is something there
And that is something that is worth exploring. I've been doing yoga ever since and
If there's one thing that I believe I will be doing until the end of my life. It is yoga because everyone can do it
Every person of every age of every state of health really
Yoga is for everyone which is I think one of its wonderful
qualities
the other thing is even if you come from that non spiritual place that I came from
You realize over time that something happens with you, and that there isn't it there is for me today
no, other way of
Connecting with myself with my mind
with my body
The way I can in yoga sometimes I find out in when I do yoga that I before I did it
I didn't know how I was that day at the moment. I do it
I do I feel how I am and I'm able to connect to myself and that's also
I think really the precondition for being able to connect to Connect
with others I
You know in looking at the theme and in thinking about this
For me the connection is very simple
the SDG Agenda
You know tells us. We know what the problems are
We know what the solutions are?
We have to simply change our ways to get there, and then we can do this together
And I think this is Ryoga can make a huge contribution
if you think it's not for you try it one time and
I think it will be for many of you actually I think it is for everybody and
One of my you know small moments of happiness in life today is to take a person to yoga
Because that just makes you happy
And this is why I'm offering a class tomorrow morning to some of your permit to some of you in the room
And you're going to come say it with many others, and I really look forward to that. Thank you so much
For now I have the honor to recognize another yoga Master
We have with us in fact yoga Matta Keiko. I cover has joined us for this event all the way from Japan
She not been a sama
in Da state distinguished guests your excellencies ladies and gentlemen
Spiritually I come from a tradition and lineage that from the time immemorial
Have kept and shared with humanity the teachings of yoga
Yoga is a science that especially with meditation
Facilitates the harmony of the body the emotions in the mind
when these elements are in harmony the individual becomes calm and peaceful in his heart if
The individual is calm and peaceful in his heart this permeates in the community and thus in the world I
Can attest from my own experience that by learning?
These practices it is possible for everyone to awaken your own energies and achieve Peace love and Harmony I
deeply believe that if that if we as individuals feel peace and harmony in ourselves that
This will lead to love and peace being spread throughout the world. I thank you very much for enabling me to be present today
Thank you
Yoga matter for that message of love may I now offer the floor to the distinguished permanent representative of Nepal I
Come from nepal from the Eastern Hills of nepal a place in an environment
Which is extremely conducive for yoga? And I also come from a family and community
Practicing Yoga, but then I'm always worried about this question of accessibility
It has to do with the commercialization of Yoga today
The commercialization and hundreds and thousands of the different types of yoga
Getting into the heads of young minds and and different easy's of people
mostly also in terms of Fashion in the forms of Fashion
What would be you wise guidance to us?
To deal with the perhaps unnecessary or over
commercialization of
yoga
Whatever becomes reasonably popular there will be enterprise around that
you shouldn't be surprised when you step out on the
Time square people will be selling yoga T-shirts and yoga whatever whatever, okay?
We shouldn't be distracted or disturbed by these things this is a part of a social thing it happens
At the same time the core of yoga is not disturbed in any way on the surface there are
small distortions here and there I
would say for the larger public to start with
Like this year when you know about four months ago
when I came to know that over 9,000 children below 18 years of age committed suicide in India and
all
1,700 below 13 years of age committed suicide
It I just thought
if our children start committing suicide we are doing something fundamentally wrong a
child is a fresh life a child is an exuberant life a
Child should be a bundle of joy
Instead of that they're deciding to take their own life which is deeply disturbing
This is not a statement about the child who took his life, but this is a statement about all of us
What are we doing with our societies?
So after cough I said let's touch 10,000 schools
But today with the cooperation of various state governments. We are touching nearly 30,000 schools over 20 million children
Why I'm saying this is why this has become possible is
Because we are offering what is called as oppa yoga?
Oopah Yoga means pre Yoga or sub yoga why this efFort towards opu Giri's?
If you offer yoga however, innocuous the practice may look to start with it has a spiritual dimension to it
Transmitting spiritual dimension to an unconscious population. We're not ready for it and
without a certain level of expertise in the teachers could be responsible over a period of time, so
We are teaching Oppa Yoga which has mainly
physiological and psychological benefits and
Here you can't do anything wrong
It's on the video all the teacher has to do is make corrections and make sure people are not doing it wrong I
Think it's a good way to spread yoga in the world is true yoga
Oopah Yoga the word for yoga in Indian languages today has acquired the meaning of being useful
but actually it originates from this that it's a pre yoga or sub yoga or a
start up start up yoga it is and it's best to start that way with large populations because when you start off an
unconscious spiritual process for people
Many of them may not be ready for it
Even if it's a good thing even if good thing happens to you when you're not ready for it things may not work very well
so
Oopah Yoga is a very
Distinct way and a safe way to take Yoga to the world
Large-scale after this happens once they feel the benefits once they experience. What difference
It makes they will naturally seek yoga in a more
Serious Manner and that is when yoga should come into their lives this could saw the concern that you expressed
But at the same time somebody is doing something funny in the name of yoga
It doesn't concern me because those things will always happen
But it's good that even commercial establishments are talking yoga. This means. It's really on I
Will now call upon Mr.. Herman Bravo who is the president of the yoga club right here at the un Mr.
Bravo you have the floor
Yoga is more than an instrument of personal transformation
Yoga has as many of the speakers have mentioned
particularly Sadhguru a
social dimension all that because the word yoga as tao remember us yoga means union
Union between the body and the mind
Union between us and other human beings
Union between human beings and nature and it is because of that
interdependence and that
interconnection that
We are able to solve many of the problems. We have many problems, but we have to be optimistic because the solution is
by changing ourselves
Many of these strategies organized by the un they have a political
Meaning they have a technology access to technologies
And they have the will at the political level
But all that is not going to work unless we go at the individual level
Yoga means personal transformation and because of that
The international day of Yoga should be a wonderful opportunity
To remind all of us that every day in our life should be a yoga day namaste. Thank
You I now give the floor to Mr.
Nate Erman of the who is the executive director of the office of the world health organization here at the united nations
Miss barrat, do you have the flow?
It's a great pleasure and an honor to attend
Celebration today and indeed this is a very unusual event for the united nations because it is deeply reflective
and it's not
composed of a prayer
Prepared speeches that people deliver in a more formal way
It actually moves all of us here to think deeply of what is being said, what is being done?
What is being conveyed by you here?
And how we can individually and collectively respond to this poll of the international yoga day, I
Have spent five years of my life in India before coming here in New York, and of course for me. It's something very
special to be here today at this day and
it's special because I
you mentioned
Sadhguru that we cannot call or
Compare and say that yoga is Indian
but it comes from India and indeed it is India's gift to the
Humankind to all over the world and it is very special because of that and I could see
the
impact of Yoga practice on
Communities in India so it makes a different
Difference, and this is why this is such a great gift of civilization
The whole Country in India every quarter of it breathes essence of yoga and it is the civilization
Calm of Yoga that has moved me when I was there
In my work, we are dealing with health issues. It is no news now that yoga is very good for health
But we also know now that health is no longer standalone
One of the sustainable development goals it is actually determinant for any other goal to to be achieved
Therefore Yoga has a very different meaning and different indeed interconnecting nature because it does
Help people to feel better
You better breathe better act better
Unite better come into
Interconnectedness which is indeed essential for sustaining our planet and Connects planet to people?
so therefore of course
We know today?
proven through many clinical trials that
Yoga helps in many conditions mental health conditions
Depression heart conditions many other conditions joint and and so on so this is not new but
there has been
traditional resistance to integrate yoga practice and other perhaps
Traditional medicine practices which are of course available worldwide but known also in India
to integrate them to the allopathic
medicine and
This resistance is slowly being overcome we as w cho are trying to put our
our
support into this process
recently this year in may in fact
India has signed and I would say landmark agreement with the world health organization to promote traditional
Medicine yoga included and to ensure quality and safety of these traditional practices
but more so to
integrate these practices into our
health services
Primary Health care and all other services that we know so it is now
Deeply understood that as all of human beings need some or another kind of health services
Be it vaccination if if they are very healthy or any other more serious
Services they also need to practice yoga because it prevents many illnesses it also gives peace of mind
it
Teaches us how to cope with all those?
different things that Modern life
stress puts on Human Brain and therefore, we
stand forward and we want to support promotion and include version of Yoga into
Medical practice all over the world we will collaborate with India on that
But my question to to you would be is there any good secret Beyond of what you have said?
how we can bring these different dimensions of health together integrate them in a better way and
make sure that yoga is no longer seen as something separate from
From what we do in health services traditionally. Thank you. Thank you very much for being here today
when
Our commitment has to shift to health not to a particular system
People are married to a particular system most of the time and they defend that system at any cost no matter what?
Every system in the world has something to contribute
but in so being committed to health we are committed to those systems because of this there has been a lot of
dislocation in how health can come about
so in Southern India in the rural part of
Tamil, Nadu we brought this about
these five dimensions
allopathy
Sita
Ayurveda Unani and Yoga together
Practice along with the naturopathy way of doing things it is done miraculous things to the populations
We were the first pilot project by the Irish
Project when it started 10 years ago now. I should become a ministry
I think yesterday or in the last week they have declared a eyes university which means ayurveda yoga
Sit down and all these things put together
This we started almost 15 years ago on today
it is an active part what we have done is we have medical vans which go with a an
Aliphatic doctor, and I sit the doctor plus. We have created over
one Hundred and Twelve, or Thirteen
Village gardens where we grow herbs over 100 and odd?
different types of herbs in a common piece of land where people are taught how to make use of it for small things like
Stomachache headache fever for the children diarrhea these kind of things all our grandmothers knew how to treat this
unfortunately even for these people are going to the doctors today and
The way it is being treated with elaborate medication
Generally in Rural, India
The cost of the medicine if you fall sick for 15 days it takes a year for you to recover
With the economics of the family gets hit for almost a year
if 15 days somebody's down and they visit the doctor and the volume of medication and treatment that happens kind of
economically sets them back quite a bit, so we our
Commitment is to health not to a particular system and
right now the government of India is doing serious efforts to integrate this thing and
We've been doing this for over 15 years very effectively
I must tell you a simple thing in rural, India which can be I was just last one week
I was in Africa even there. I thought this is something that will work. We created. What is called as a wave of health
About simple things how health can be created with within the family for every family
One of the things that was done
I won't go into all the details one simple thing with it was
Every home should have a papaya tree a banana tree a Moringa. Tree and a patch of Greens
This transformed health situations in such a big way
You won't believe such a small initiative such a simple initiative, what a difference
it is done to people's lives like this small initiative can be brought because
Considering the economics of those families, it's very important. We need to come up with solutions
that works for them in this yoga practice has a significant role because
creating a vibrant
healthy Vibrant and effervescent
Population is very very important to fulfill the sustainable goals if we don't create that kind of population
We will be only talking about sustainability. It will not happen. We need to create this and the goal is
the tools of self transformation should not be in the hands of a guru or an
Organization or some other authority the idea is to bring this into everybody's life like today
Everybody owns a toothbrush which is created oral health just like that everybody should have
some tools for self transformation it is with this kind of
Commitment that we are going ahead and
There is a big support now in the world wherever we go in the remotest parts of Africa
That I was there in the last one week it was incredible to see that all of them know about yoga
I know this tWenty-five years ago when I went into rural India in a big way
They knew what is Coca-cola, but they did not know, what is yoga?
But today in the remotest part of Africa people know, what is yoga? This is transformation in many ways
Thank you said Gucci, and how would you like to reflect on this questions like to thank you all you?
There's been so much beauty in this room and so much intelligence that of
what the world is all about and what we are all about and what we're going to do about it and
I think that
it's so it's
Absolutely fantastic to sit here and listen
to all of the things that I pondered for so many years and wondered about
Not always finding the answers
But today was a revelation and a very special thing to happen to the whole world in
This room you've started something
That we've needed for a long time. It's out in the open now
Yoga is beautiful
But yoga's only beautiful if we use it and we make it part of our lives
I want to thank your I
Now give the floor to Mr.. Rajeev Leela. Who has joined us all the way from Texas
if you could help us understand the role of a guru of a teacher not in the true academy sense where
stem
professor teaches me science and technology, but rather
Coming from humanity and that you know that that union among all of us
When you say I said guru you're saying an uneducated guru
That's what it means
because
You don't come to set the guru to know about the scriptures you don't come to set the guru to know about rituals
Because the only thing that I know is I know this piece of life from its origin to its ultimate and this all I know
by knowing this by inference, you know just about everything because
Everything is made the same way
Today there is something called as a constructional theory where they're talking about how the atom and the cosmos are essentially
Fundamentally same design only the sophistication and complexity is multiplying
So there may be on the you and me are made the same way only the complexity has multiplied
Having said that
In what way is a guru relevant means?
You trying to walk an uncharted terrain?
Every year I trek in the himalayas in nepal and Tibet
Once you go into the mountains
That illiterate Sherpa who is there who has not been to school?
But who if he says right you turn right? If he says left you turn left you better do that otherwise you won't come back
You do that because he knows the terrain
the same goes for this
This is just an inner terrain. It's best to walk with somebody who's already walked the path
otherwise
Simple things will become complicated. What is next door you will go around the world and come back to it?
all this complication about for example
Today if you are to the word meditation people think something very difficult to do
To put it simply first of all the word meditation English word meditation does not describe anything in particular
If you sit with your eyes closed, they're saying you're meditating
With your eyes closed you can do japeth aparna Dhyana Samadhi Junya
There are any number of things you could do or you might have just mastered the art of sleeping in vertical postures
It happens
so
When we say meditation we must understand it's not an act. It is a quality
It is like you want flowers in your garden if you want flowers in your garden
You don't have to sit there and do flower meditation
You don't have to think flowers you have to think soil, men your water sunlight
have nothing to do with flowers, but if you do those things flowers will happen because it's a consequence right now because
We have gotten into this madness of being a goal-oriented society. We are interested in the flower
We are not interested in the plant
This is the fundamental that the yoga will change within you you understand that you have to handle the process
Right for a consequence to happen so in yoga there is a saying
That if you're goal-oriented your one eye will be on the goal that
Means you will find your way only with one eye
which is an inefficient way of doing things if you use both your eyes to find your way it's much more efficient, so
Why is a guru needed it can be done without it
I'm asking you a simple question
Even to learn ABc the alphabet you needed a teacher
But you could have learnt it by yourself
Maybe you don't take in a lifetime, but the teacher taught it to you in a month or two. That's a big difference
so like somebody was talking to me and they asked what is this guru about I said this is the GPs a
Living GPS a guru positioning system. You know
If you want to find your way, it's best in uncharted Terrain
Unknown Terrain
It's best to walk with somebody who's already done the terrain once or many times
Otherwise simple things will become very complex
my pleasure to recognize
Miss Denise quatro
Who is the chair of the International Yoga day committee at the United Nations and an executive board member of the United nations?
Stop recreation council enlightenment society denise you have the floor the international day of yoga committee at the un
Came into existence last year in the summer after the first international day of yoga
Sri, Chinmoy Years ago his vision was to have peace meditations with the staff and he started the yoga club which
German is the president of how do you see the un system?
Meaning the secretarial staff who work here the diplomats from the different countries
business and the NGos Civil Society who tried to implement the sdgs
How do you see yoga bringing us all together? Thank you so much
This is being said again and again about peace so we need to look at this
When we say peace or mental peace as people are talking about it?
today even so-called spiritual leaders are talking about peace being the highest goal in one's life, but
I would like to ask you please look at your life, and see if you want to enjoy your dinner tonight
Even if you are not ecstatic at least you must be peaceful
to enjoy your dinner if
you want to enjoy the people around you at least you must be peaceful and happy if you want to enjoy a walk on the
Street you must be peaceful and happy otherwise. It's not possible
So what is very fundamental to a fundamental requirement in our life?
Unfortunately, we are pushing it as an ultimate goal of our life to be peaceful is not the highest thing it is the most basic
Requirement if a human being cannot even be peaceful there is really nothing that they can do
This means that you're not even able to harness
Your body and mind the way you should
To look at it from one perspective
All human experience has a chemical basis to it what you call as peace is a certain kind of chemistry
What you call as Joy is another kind of chemistry
blissfulness another ecstasy another agony and the kind
Anxiety fear tests rest tension, whatever, you call it every human experience
Has a chemical basis to it
we have not been thought about how to deal with this when I say how to deal with this as is as a
Technology if you want to look at this as a machine
This is the most sophisticated piece of technology on the planet the question is
To deal with this high level of technology have you read even the user's manual that's a question
Yoga means it is the users manual of how to conduct this one
I would say when you ask this question how to bring all these diverse people together in this organization
It's best to start with the simplest process
Which does not even need a specific allotment of time?
This is where opa yoga will become useful people can sit in their work
Spaces and right there they can do it three minutes
Anytime they feel like it. He does not need a specific condition
He does not need a specific time if they see the benefit which they definitely will in a matter of two weeks time
they will see a distinct benefit doing it wherever they are it does not need any kind of specific discipline or time or
other conditions required for normal
Proper Yoga to be done. I think this would be a good way to integrate them because
This predates all religion. This is not about you versus me
this is why I said this is not Indian because a science cannot be indian yes it originated from India as
Indians we are proud of it
But it does not belong to India the very fact that united nations has declared an international yoga day me
India has gifted it to the world it does not belong to India anymore, we
it's it's not something that we have to possess and identify with
the significant aspect of my personal work has been
To remove all the frills of culture that yoga had acquired through this, Millennia of transmission
Slowly whatever you do in a particular culture it will acquire cultural frills
so one thing is to take off all the cultural frills and present it as an absolute science and the technology for well being
This is an important thing in an organization like this where there are people from every nation
There are people from every kind of denominations every kind of faith every kind of beliefs every kind of ideologies
It's very very important that yoga is brought as a proper science
Not as a cultural thing not as an Indian thing. It's very important to do that
you
Questioner: Many times in my daily life
fear stops me from doing small things and bigger things
fear from failure,
fear from
maybe from rejection sometimes.
How to overcome this fear?
Sadhguru: You cannot overcome something which does not exist.
Right now, are you in fear?
Right now,
that I may say something damaging?
Is that the fear? (Laughs)
Every moment of your life, you are in fear?
No.
So, when you are not in fear,
just stay like that
because to create fear,
you have to use excessive imagination.
To not be in fear, you don’t have to do anything.
Fear is happening because of excessive imagination
things that have not happened, you are creating.
What may happen in your mind
happens in thousand different formats
and most probably it never happens.
The things that you have feared
Take hundred things that you have feared.
Probably ninety nine of them never happened, isn’t it?
Yes?
So, your fear is always about that which does not exist.
You cannot fight or you cannot overcome that which does not exist.
We can overcome something which… that exists.
You cannot overcome that which does not exist.
We just have to give up that effort.
Enjoy the fear.
After all, it’s your making.
You like horror movies?
Yes.
I mean, you are saying no
but you are producing them.
Just they are not making money, that’s all.
Fear means you’re producing horror movies in your mind.
Nobody else is willing to watch.
That’s bad for the producer,
but you are producing them.
So, you produce something else
produce a comedy, a love story, suspense thriller
try and see today.
Just sit down, produce a love story,
a suspense thriller,
a comedy -
five five minutes movies you make in your mind,
really.
Start using your mind differently.
It’s just gotten into your pattern.
It’s just gotten into your pattern of
just creating horror movies all the time.
You have watched enough horror movies, they’re boring.
Create something else.
Even… It’s not that if you produce these movies,
those things will happen in your life.
Still they may not happen.
At least you enjoy the movie. (Laughs)
In reality, it may not happen,
so what?
At least you enjoy what’s happening in your mind
if you cannot enjoy what’s happening in the world, isn’t it?
That much privilege every human being deserves. Isn’t it so?
Even if the world is not kind to him,
at least his own mind should be kind to him
so produce some nice movies. (Laughs)
Questioner: Sadhguru Namaste.
Sadhguru what is cosmic will
and what is free will?
Is free will same as cosmic will
or is there anything like cosmic which is predestined?
Sadhguru: What you call as cosmic will is not will as you know it,
as human will,
as your mind’s will.
It has a certain pattern,
it has a certain quality.
That which rules the cosmos has a certain… a consciousness and a tendency of its own.
That is always there,
that you and me right now exist is cosmic will,
but right now,
you decided to come to sathsang is of course your will, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
So cosmic will is not like a decision.
It is just there.
It is because of cosmic will,
we have taken on this form.
It is because of cosmic will,
the planet is going around the sun.
These are not as human thoughts are;
this is just the quality of the nature.
Right now,
water flows from a high place to a low place.
Try to stop it whichever way you want.
It seems to have a will of its own,
but that is not a will;
it is flowing according to the laws of gravity.
So cosmic will is like the gravitational force and various other things.
It just is there always.
It only acts that way
because the very framework of life is based on the cosmic will,
but today you decide to do this or that,
that is definitely your will.
Cosmic will has no role in this,
but you can use the cosmic force to make it
make your will into a reality.
Right now gravitational force is working,
using that I am sitting here,
otherwise I would be floating all over the place.
Yes?
I would need an anchor to stay here.
Because gravity is working I am enjoying sitting here,
otherwise
using the same gravity I can dance.
It’s my will.
Sitting is my will,
dancing is my will.
If I want, I can jump down, that is also my will,
but all these things cannot happen without the gravity.
That’s the nearest analogy we can get there probably.
So cosmic will is always in play,
we are enjoying it every moment of our life
or we are suffering it sometimes.
The gravity can make you dance,
the gravity can make you fall if you’re not in tune with it.
So that is where your will plays.
Your will determines
and your will is able to use the cosmic will.
Without that your will wouldn’t even exist.
It is cosmic will that you must have a will,
but do not try to fulfill your life through your will
because your will is generally empowered by a thought
and your thought is essentially an accumulated stuff.
Your thought is what you have gathered from around you.
It’s the data that you have gathered that you’re reprocessing,
recycling in so many different ways.
Doing things with willpower is okay
if you are aiming for small little things.
Today morning you want to get up at 5.00 o’clock,
you’re doing it with willpower or alarm power? (Laughter)
If the alarm rings also,
you still need willpower to come out of your bed.
If you do this, you may get to do things,
but at the end of the day you will have a long face.
Instead of trying to do this with willpower,
you do it with devotion,
you do it with love.
Now I want to get up at 5.00 o’clock
because I have something that I really want to do.
Not that I have to do this,
there’s nothing in my life that I have to do.
Everything in my life are things that I want to do.
So if alarm is at 5.00 o’clock, I get up at 4.30,
because I want to do it.
If you conduct your life as I have to do it,
because that’s willpower.
‘Oh, no matter what I must do it, I must do it, I must do it!’
You may get to do it,
but your face will become long, miserable face.
Everything happened,
but at the end of the day you have a long face;
purpose is defeated, isn’t it?
The purpose of doing all that is already been defeated. Isn’t it so?
Because you did not enjoy it,
it does not fulfill you, what is the point?
So there is no need to do things
to conduct your life with willpower.
Here and there small things,
sometimes when your body is aching,
on that day you need willpower to push yourself a little bit,
but do not try to conduct the life process itself with willpower
because you will become a long successful face.
Ulcer in your stomach,
success in your bag,
face so long nobody wants to see it
or your chin will be scraping on the Hyderabad roads. (Laughter)
Not good,
because I have a cushion; what will you do? (Laughter)
Intoxication is the nature of the moon
May 10th is a special pournami are a special full moon day because it's called Buddha Pournami
this is the day Gautama the buddha got enlightened
you notice
This year it's on 10th of may this full moon day is the day gautama the buddha got enlightened
There are many aspects to his life
The most important aspect is that he is a Bhu-dda
That's not his name
His name is Gautama Siddhartha, but he is a Buddha
Buddha means he transcended his intellect
Bhu means Buddhi
Dha means Datha
Buddhi means the intellect datha means one who is above one who is above his intellect is a buddha
One who is in his intellect is a non-stop suffering human being
Something happens they suffer nothing happens they suffer whichever way
that is if you're below the mind we call them Buddhu

If you are above the mind you are a buddha if you're below the mind you are Buddhu if you are in the mind
are nonstop suffering
So, how did you become this?
He tried many things in his life. He was a prince of a small princely state
because
some
yogi predicted that this will either become a great emperor or
become a great sage
when you made this prediction the father got
little
excited. he did not want him to become a great sage. He wanted to become a great emperor
So he decided he will not expose him to because he thought by
Being exposed to some suffering or misery he may turn into usage
So he kept him in utter pleasure... the best of food, best of clothes, best of pleasures, everything
When he was a 19 years of age he got him married to a very pretty young woman
kept him in a palace secluded from the rest of the society
Where he lives in pleasure never exposed to any kind of suffering.
One day he thought he will just take a drive through the town he asked his charioter to take him across
So he was going and then he saw a man who was old.
Was going like this
So he had never seen old man in his life his father had protected him from all this
See what has happened to him, so the charioter said that's just an old man
How does it happen he asked?
Said everybody gets old some day
He looked at himself use a nice youth
What me also?
Said yes, everybody everybody gets old
they live long enough they get old
You this was a realization for him. I will become like this
Then he saw a man lying on the street was ill with something
Not able to get up in great suffering. He said stop. What is this guy? What's he doing?
He said oh, he's sick unfortunately
What does that mean?
He said my body sometimes it gets sick
It can happen to anybody it can happen to just anybody me a prince
Can happen to me it can happen to anybody?
And he's how I can become like this
Then they were going further. He was completely disturbed by this then he saw a funeral they were carrying a
Dead body of A man
What happened to that guy? Oh he just died?
What does that mean? that happens to everybody without exception?
Then he said what am I doing just eating pleasures nonsense? What am I doing with myself and
He struggled he went into turmoil within himself
This suddenly being a prince and his pleasures and all this palace
Suddenly broke apart for him and he started looking
What is the point of all this this is going to get old this may get sick for sure this will be dead?
What am I investing my entire life in this?
But by then he had an infant boy
he looked at his wife and
his child
this
Loving wife and this lovely little baby. He could not leave he struggled and struggled and struggled
By then a little or one and a quarter years passed
when the boy was one and a half years of age
He could not hold it anymore in the middle of the night like a thief
Without telling anybody he slipped out of the palace and left for good
He went in search. I want to know the truth about this life
He went from school to school
These are times when different schools were established in India
At one point there were over
1,800 schools, I'm saying not just institutions
1800 different ways of doing things
[1800] different varieties [of] Yoga
Not the kind that you're seeing in
Somebody doing like this somebody doing like this really intricate
Expressions, it is like how the medical science is becoming today
25 years ago you wanted a medical check-up. All you needed was your family doctor
today
But every part of your body there [is] a doctor I
Was [a] Few years ago. I had
You know I had a knee injury. I was playing soccer, and I broke something in the knee and
I was all packed up, and I was speaking
That's how I got into golf
Because of this knee injury
Somebody told me gifted me of golf kit and said Sadhguru, you're too old for any other game. You just play golf
So I was sitting [there] in Atlanta talking speaking at a place
Then I was in pain, I couldn't even move
so
After the when this is over. I mean when I was speaking one person raised his hand I thought he wants a question
But then he said Sadhguru, I would like to examine your knee after
The zoa, I [am] a knee doctor. I
Said come on. You are not to panic [so] [no] no I am a new doctor
Then I said right or left
Which one are you?
so
specialization
Specialization is going a time will come probably in 50 years time if you want a medical check-up
You need 100 doctors to check you by the time you get these 100 appointments
Maybe you need an undertaker
Then it will become ridiculous. Okay, you went to three doctors. All right you and do
Five doctors all right if it becomes fifty [hundred] doctors for a medical check-up
It's become ridiculous. Isn't it this happened to yogic system
People started specializing and specializing in variety of small things
Each specialization has a whole thing by [itself]
Someone just came and told me [they're] a dentist okay. [I'm] not speaking in another thing for example dentistry just 32 teeth
Right they study for nine Years
[Thirty-Two] teeth
Nine years of study still they don't know everything about it. That's the nature of creation
If you start studying one tooth at a time, you will see each one of them has something specific about it
You somebody can spend a lifetime of study just learning about one tooth
Just see if you had 32 dentists to look at your mouth
Disaster you are isn't it so a specialization?
Specialization happens when it crosses a certain point it will become ridiculous this happened to yoga it
crossed that point where
[1800] schools different specializations of Yoga happened
So that is when patanjali came and kind of assimilated everything into yoga Sutras to minimize this expanse
That was growing endlessly
so when Gothama came it was post patanjali, but
Still there were many things so he went from school to school
He pursued eight different forms of Samadhi
We talk about [semantics], okay?
He pursued eight different forms of Samadhi
He saw all of them were wonderful experiences, but still it did not liberate him
so in this condition
He was walking as a samana. There's a certain system of
practice called Samanas their fundamental practices this
They will never ask for food
You should not go in pursuit of food
because
they want to beat the
fundamental Instinct of survival
No matter what you're always going in pursuit of food, please understand this you may complicate it in so many ways, but fundamentally
You're talking so much the word economy means you're just thinking about survival all the time isn't it
[sir], I will glorify it, but till it is survival
So one fundamental Sadhana for them is you never pursue your instinct of survival
You simply keep going so samanas used to just walk
never asking for food
but the culture was sensitive if they saw a spiritual person walking people will cook at home and run behind him and
serve him wherever he is
Because they know he will not ask for food
Today if you become a samana you will walk yourself to death
Those days people were sensitive to his sadhana and responded so there were thousands of samanas walking the country
so Gotham on became a samana and
Even if you are not asking for food, you will walk near a town
so the food will come
but Gothama took it too seriously and
Just walked he became all bones
just
bones and a bag of skin like that he became
Then he came to a place where there was a river called Niranjana unfortunately that river is gone now
no, more river
just
About 18 to 20 inches of water may be moving little rapidly
He stepped into it halfway down into the river. He did not have the energy to cross
There was a tree branch a dead branch he just held onto it
He doesn't have the strength to take the next step
But he's not the kind of man to let go he held on we don't know for how long
People say for a very long time maybe it was two minutes
When you're feeling, so weak those two minutes might have looked like
many years
Then as he hung on
He just realized what is it that? I'm striving for
What is it I'm wondering the entire country growing from school to school learning this learning that what is it that? I'm looking for
Then he realized
This is really nothing
This life is wrong. All I have to do is
Just take away the barriers which are not allowing me to experience this
When he realized that everything is within him. There's nowhere to search
Suddenly he had the energy to take the next step in the next step across the river came and sat down under that
Now very famous bodhi tree
Which has become more then the buddha himself?
A
part of the tree a remnant Or a progeny of the tree still exists in both Gaya
and
He sat under the tree. It was this full moon night. Which is coming now
on 10th of May
He sat there, and he sat there with this determination either
I must see the ultimate nature of my existence now
Or I will sit here and die I will not open my eyes till I know this
Once he made that resolve because the only problem is there is no resolve every two minutes your intentions are changing
If you are totally on to know, what is within you how long should it take?
It should happen in a moment, isn't [it]?
Because there is no distance to travel
Time is a quantity which [is] necessary only when there is a distance to travel isn't it?
If there is no distance to travel if I ask you, how long does it take for you [to] sit [here]?
You're already sitting
It's already there. It doesn't take any time
So you're already alive and on it doesn't take any time for realization because you don't have to do anything particularly?
when he saw this he was fully enlightened and the moon was shining and
He had not eaten for many months on end properly used actually for years. He was a samana and
People around him he had gathered about five disciples. I think
These guys thought he's real because he doesn't eat his really rigid
and
They saw he's in some state exuberant state and they could see the light on his face
Then they were waiting for him to open his eyes and give the teaching
He opened his eyes look them smiled and said cook something let's eat
They have a totally disappointed they thought he has lost it
They walked with him for four to eight years
when he had nothing, but torture
When he got enlightened they left him
because
They wanted to hear something severe
He said cook something let's eat
We've been wasting our time
There are many beautiful episodes in his life
When he one day walked upon the Riverbank after he has become a good and went and sat down under a tree
Tree not because tree is the best place to sit under you know ants can get you
Because that was the only real estate of those times there are no buildings and buildings and buildings everywhere
So tree was a good place to a pleasant place to sit under rather than sitting in harsh sun. You sit under a tree

An astrologer who is of great
proficiency in history
Saw the footprint on the Riverbank he had come to
In the in India people of any this thing means bad means always river those rivers are going away. I will tell you later
bath means always river
So he came for a bath that they were then he saw the footprint
There is a whole science
or
rather
observations
Through which by looking at the way [one's] feet is somebody predicts exactly what he will do
So he saw the footprint and then he saw that this is the footprint of an emperor somebody who should rule the world
Then he wondered why would such a person be in this remote place near the jungle
Then he followed the footprint
Thinking he will meet an emperor
Then he saw this monk
Gothama sitting under a tree
Then he looked at this this he thought either my astrology has gone all wrong
or I am being fooled or and in some kind of a hallucination
What's happening here then he went to Gotham and asked who are you?
Gautama was in this kind of just Jeet kind of state
He said and no crime. [I] am just a nobody
But you have the feet of an emperor you should conquer the world
Gautama said that I will
But not by conquest see there are two ways you can have the world either by conquest or by inclusion
yes, I
can make you yours either by capturing you chaining you and making you do what I want or
By including you as a part of myself. Yes
Both ways something or somebody becomes yours isn't it
But if you go by conquest, it will be a pain in your neck always
if you include
This will become a great enhancement of life
He said I am the emperor of the world, but then he said you're a monk you own  nothing.
I own nothing and I am a nobody that is why?
Everything is mine
Even mathematicians are trying to teach you the zero on the infinite or one and the same
So you becoming of a no thing?
does not mean
You are of no use
You are [a] no thing means you have  become
All inclusive, isn't it you're something means you can only be that
You're nothing you can be any way you want this is how this life is made if your ability to respond is not curtailed
You can be anything you wish at any given moment, isn't it?
So Gothama said I am  anyway the emperor of the world if that's the word you like, but I'm actually a nobody
Because everything is anyway mine
If you see, I'm responsible for everything everything is yours isn't it how does somebody become yours
Because you want them or you take responsibility for that?
because you take [responsibility] [for] them they become yours not otherwise, isn't it
If you own them forcefully they will never be yours
Yes, or no if you forcefully own
 somebody will they ever be yours they'll never ever be yours
So this astrologer sat down
They said you're a monk you have nothing on top of it. You say you're just it. I'm sorry
I'm top of it you say I'm a nobody and
Everything is yours. What is this?
Gothama said you come I have a way for you
You are busy making predictions of Life
I have a plan
Why do you make predictions of life?
[you're] incapable of making a plan and executing a plan that is why you fall back any predictions isn't it?
if you are capable of making a plan and executing the plan would you fall back on predictions?
no
So gautama said you were busy making predictions. I'm here. I have a plan
Come become a part of my plan
We'll make something else happen
You must become a part of this plan we can make something wonderful happen
this same world
This same World can be turned into paradise
If all its all of us, go buy a paradise plan isn't it?
Yes, or no
The question is only
do that because between a
Possibility, and the reality there is a distance or do we have the courage and the commitment to walk the distance. That's all it is
Yes
you
You know, they found or they seem to have found something near to what they are
referring to as god particle, you know this?
It's called the Boson, which has a mass which is of a certain significance.
If you try to look at the whole universe, you will not see anything.
If you just look at an atom intensely enough and if the atom yields to you, then you know how the whole universe is made.
Now, they are no more talking about atom, they were talking about subatomic particles.
Now they are not even talking about that. When two subatomic particles collide, not atoms,
when two protons collide, something spills out of that, they want to see that.
But when you say I am on the path of yoga, you don’t
you are not even interested in the tiny miniscule particle;
you want to see the empty space which holds all this in place.
That is their desire also but they’ve kind of given up on it.
That’s their desire also that they want to see what is it that’s holding all this together.
But they understand, they are sensible enough to understand
with these two eyes, with these senses we can’t see it. The only way is to go to the nearest point and see it.
The nearest point is as far away as Timbuktu. Do you understand?
Right now, I don’t know if you are interested in these things but you must know these things
because it's got a very direct relationship with yogic system.
There was a time when scientists believed…, they thought… let’s say if this is an atom –
big enough for you to see, okay - if this is an atom - proton, neutron, electron are all embedded in it like these dots.
They thought it was like that. Then by the time you came to High School they wrote a different picture,
they wrote one central circle which contains proton, neutron and
electrons are going around like planets in different formats. Yes, you have seen those pictures?
But now they know it's completely wrong. And we have always known it's completely wrong.
That’s why text books never ever interested me because when I look at it, it looked dumb.
Today, suppose… suppose this is the size of the core of the atom,
the electrons are, let’s say somewhere approximately a mile away, that’s the kind of distance,
you understand, within an atom. An atom is not like this. No human being has ever seen an atom,
do you know this? Forget about a proton, neutron, electron. Nobody has ever witnessed an atom.
Even in a super electron microscope you cannot see it. In that, there is a housing where proton,
neutrons are there and the electrons are about a mile away, in comparison, in proportion I am saying.
So what is the maximum substance in this? Emptiness, isn't it?
We always told you, the yogic systems always insisted that
the microcosm and the macrocosm are made the same way. If you know this piece of life
you will know everything in the universe because that’s how it is made.
When they say, if you know the way these Bosons behave and what they are, they are saying
we will know the whole universe, the way the universe was made we will understand.
But you don’t understand that you are also a bloody Boson. In the cosmic space you are just a Boson.
So you are as much as a Higgs Boson in the universe.
If you observe this, if you pay enough attention to this you would know everything.
But if you have not even paid attention to anything around you, paying attention to within you will be out of question.
Prathap Reddy:  Pranams to Sadhguru.
I think it's an electrifying thing in each of us
to have your presence so close,
so endearing
I know everyone in the beautiful auditorium here
I think all of us when we go home we’re going to switch on the TV
and want to see something which is… or open the newspaper in the morning,
there are many times all of us feel this,
I think I’m sharing everyone’s opinion here –
what’s our nation,
why is our nation like this?
Can we bring a change in the way things are and go back, you know.
Is that
Is that too far?
Or is something that we are asking, is it too much for us to ask as citizens
and as you quoted saying as law abiding people?
Sadhguru: (Laughs)There are various things to India as a nation.
We are a unique concoction, okay? (Laughs)
Compared to any other country, we are a… we are a magnificent chaos.
(Laughter/Applause)
Don’t miss the word ‘magnificent’. (Laughs)
We are a magnificent chaos.
Prathap Reddy:The second they’ll feel elated.(Laughter)
Sadhguru: It is just tha tthis chaos can produce genius,
but at the same time the lack of system can frustrate people to such a point,
that even simple things may not happen.
This is the reality of our country.
This has been the reality of our country for a long time.
We produce lot of genius,
but we don’t have a system to
For the genius to find expression there is no system,
so we have to find the balance between these two.
So a systematized presentation of management is needed
for all levels of people.
In this country,
leadership is one big bankruptcy.
If we utter the word ‘leader,’
people will just naturally think a chief minister,
a prime minister, like this.
If you manage to produce one good leader somewhere in some sector,
down the line, people will worship him.
They will not reinforce him.
What a leader needs is a backup of leadership
that he can bank on.
But you have people worshipping you,
not supporting you to do what you need to do.
So this is something that needs to happen to the nation that
we need to build leaders on all levels of life.
You will see if some situation happens on the street,
you will see thousands of people will stand there and gape at it.
There is not one leader who’ll stand up and say,
‘Okay, let’s do this.’
Neither a policeman nor the common public,
nor many, many people who are there who’re holding different positions in their life,
do not have the thing to stand up and take leadership for that situation.
There’re no such people.
You see this in many other countries, it is not so.
On the street if something happens,
immediately people will jump and take leadership
because some kind of training has gone into them.
No training has gone here into people’s way of managing things.
Prathap Reddy: We’re teaching that and it’s happening,
but not at the speed with which it should happen for the whole nation.
Sadhguru: No, but we have 1.2 billion people.
You train a few thousand people
and we think we’re doing something.
No,
they’re 1.2 billion people.

(Sadhguru): Now
the essence of all this is,
first thing is to understand
the nature of how existence is happening.
Either you can look at this (Gestures)
or you can look at the atom
or you can look at the universe.
If you want to look at the universe, it is complex,
it is difficult because you don’t have a gallery seat, you know.
There is no
it is not like a stadium you can sit somewhere and watch the whole universe,
very difficult.
You can only see it in pieces.
If you want to watch an atom,
nobody has seen an atom, do you know this?
Do you know this?
Even in a super electron microscope,
you can’t see an atom.
We have observed its activity
but we have never seen an atom as such,
but we have broken it.
We are capable of breaking things that even we cannot see,
that’s our
We are very proud of this these days. (Laughs)
We can break anything.
We can make it or not is a questionable thing,
but we can break anything we want.
Even if we cannot see it, we can break it.
Now what you see and what you do not see itself is a very dicey thing.
In the sense,
what is it that you can see?
Right now, can you see my hand?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes. You can see my hand only because my hand stops light.
If my hand did not stop this light,
if it allowed light to pass through you wouldn’t see this hand.
Yes?
Or in other words,
right now your visual apparatus can see
only those things which stop light.
Anything that allows light through,
you cannot see it.
You cannot see light itself first of all.
Can you see the light that is here?
No.
Only whatever stops light you can see it.
What does not stop light, you cannot see it.
Tch… Very bad, isn't it?
You must be able to see all those things which allow light to pass through
because they are important things.
But right now, your visual apparatus are trained to see
or capable of seeing only that which stops light.
So the whole process of seeing life the way it is means
first of all, evolving an eye,
a thoughtless eye,
an eye which is free of thought.
When I say free of thought,
it is free from the taint of memory.
Right now, these two eyes are heavily loaded with memory.
See, you can see this
if you see a group of people like this,
if you just casually look like this,
if the…among these hundreds of people,
if there is one face that you are familiar with;
you will see suddenly that face sticks out.
Have you noticed this?
Have you noticed this?
You are going on a street,
there’re hundred people standing there,
your friend is among that.
If you look here just this friend’s face
is more clear than the rest of the faces
because this eye works with memory.
The more memory you have, the better it sees.
No memory, it cannot see.
Memory means an accumulated past.
Memory means information.
Memory means that which does not exist
but acts out as if it does.
Memories are more real than reality. Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
See I want you to understand,
everything in your life is run by memory.
Not just your computer stick
everything in your life.
When I say memory, it's not just what you carry here, (Gestures)
your very body is a body of memory.
Why if you eat a banana,
it becomes a masculine body
and if she eats a banana, it becomes a feminine body,
is simply because of the memory that it contains, isn't it?
The information that is stored in this body and that body is different.
Same banana, it becomes a man;
same banana, it becomes a woman.
Yes or no?
Hmm?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Or you’re eating different types of bananas? (Laughter)
Same thing, same food if you eat,
it is becoming one way.
In one person, it is becoming dark skin.
In another person, it’s becoming fair skin,
how?
The memory that you carry.
Do you remember your great great great great great grandfather?
You don’t but his nose is sitting on your face. (Laughter)
Your body remembers, isn't it?
You may not have no idea who it was but your body remembers even today.
A million years ago how your forefathers were, still it remembers, isn't it?
So what you call as my body is just a body of memory.
And eyes are loaded with memory.
An eye which is loaded with memory,
an eye which is corrupted with memory cannot see anything the way it is.
It will only see things as it is convenient
because the software is working from inside.
It will not allow you to see anything the way it is.
This is what traditionally we are referring to as karma.
It is there in your body,
it is there in your energies,
it is there in the way your chemical reactions happen,
it is there in your brain,
it is there in your mind,
it is there in everything.
In the very physical energy that you carry, there is memory
because you will see each person’s energies behave differently from the other
simply because of the type of memory it carries.
If you want to get rid of this, it’s a long process.
And if you get rid of this,
dismantling of the personality and the body will happen.
So another way is to create a distance from it.
Just hold it little away.
When you want to play with it, you play with it.
When you want to switch it off, you must be able to switch it off.
So for this, an external view is needed.
Right now your ears are loaded with memory,
your eyes are loaded with memory,
your tongue is loaded with memory.
Why… (Laughs)
if you are born in Karnataka if you go to North India,
food doesn’t taste good is because
the tongue is loaded with memory.
Yes or no?
Have you suffered this or no?
You went north and they said aloo bhaji, aloo… (Laughter)
aloo mutter, anoo…aloo palak, aloo parotta, aloo-aloo aloo-aloo they said,
you couldn’t stay there. (Laughs)
Because your tongue is loaded with memory,
it wants the same things back, otherwise it will suffer.
So what “being loaded with memory” means is
a cocoon of the past is holding you.
It will not allow you to even move into the present.
A cocoon of the past holds you
and you allow it to do this because it feels safe,
it creates a cocoon.
There is safety; but in safety, there is also imprisonment.
You’re really safe if we lock you up in a safe, isn't it?
But the problem is you can’t get out.
That’s the whole problem.
Walls that you build as self-protection
they also become the walls of self-imprisonment.
That is the nature of life.
If you lock yourself from inside or outside,
it’s the same thing.
As long as you do not open the door,
whether somebody locked you from outside or you locked yourself from inside,
there is no difference.
Anyway you are imprisoned, isn't it?
At least… somebody locked you from outside,
you can at least complain and scream.
You locked yourself from inside, you can only be depressed,
you cannot even scream.
At whom will you scream?
So this process of what we’re looking at is,
the memory imprints itself on all levels right up to the elemental level.
From the five elements which function here,
from just after that memory’s work starts.
So when we uttered the word karma,
it is not one simple formula
or it’s not …you know
people are saying theory of karma; we are not talking about any theory.
We are referring to a certain reality.
Karma means memory -
action and memory.
Past action exists only in the form of memory. Isn't it so?
Yes?
Memory not just what you carry here (Gestures);
every cell in the body carries its own memory.
Why one atom behaves differently from another atom
though the same ingredients is, it has a memory.
A hydrogen atom has one kind of memory,
oxygen atom has another kind of memory -
unless you mix them up, they will continue to behave like that.
It is in a small circle,
you are in a little larger circle;
the universe is in a much larger circle
but the same memory rules all of it.
So when we said karma,
we are not talking about some concept or philosophy,
we are referring to a certain reality which is finding manifestation as who you are.
The very shape of your body is because of memory.
If a bird eats a mango, it becomes a bird;
if a worm eats a mango, it becomes a worm;
if you eat a mango, you become a human being.
Same mango, how many things it’s doing,
depending upon what kind of memory it carries, isn't it?
You…What you call as a seed,
if you plant the same seed
if you plant a seed in the same soil
here you plant a mango tree,
here you pan…plant an apple tree in the same soil,
this (Gestures) will only produce apples,
this (Gestures) will only produce mangoes.
I know there is a newspaper picture where a… you know
a jackfruit has become bananas.
That’s different.
Yes,
you saw this?
Are you all from Bangalore or Devanahalli? (Laughter)
No, you didn’t see this?
A bunch of bananas are coming out of a jackfruit for some reason. (Laughs)
That’s a freak.
And that’s happened because of some mix up.
We don’t know who did the mix up. (Laughs)
But essentially if you… in the same soil
if you plant an apple seed and a mango seed,
this (Gestures) will only produce apples,
this (Gestures) will only produce mangoes
because seed is a certain amount of memory, isn't it?
Whether it is a seed of a plant or
your father’s seed which entered your mother’s womb,
it is just memory and memory and memory. Isn't it so?
This is karma and this goes right back.
Right up to the elemental level,
everything is memory.
Only the pure element is free from memory.
So the idea, when we start,
we’re starting off ‘Bhutesha’
because that’s the most important thing
that he mastered the elements.
That’s why we bow down to him because
Because he mastered the elements,
he has an eye which has no memory.
A taintless eye which sees everything just the way it is.
So yoga essentially means developing an eye
which is not contaminated by memory,
which simply sees.
It does not see things the way your memory perverts it.
It simply sees everything the way it is.
This eye will see those things which do not stop light.
Right now these two eyes can only see what stops light.
If you start seeing something that does not stop light
that means another dimension of the eye is beginning to function.
Sadhguru: See, there are no bad things and good things.
If you really look at it carefully,
there are no bad things and good things;
people perform actions,
some actions produce miserable consequences,
some produce wonderful consequences,
that's all it is.
Every human being is in pursuit of his happiness.
In pursuit of your happiness,
we are doing so many things on this planet.
We think right now India is developing
or the world is developing, whatever,
but if you ask the insects –
Indian insects I am talking about,
they are also citizens of this nation
they think we’re doing the most horrible things to them.
If you ask the birds, they will think we’re doing the most horrible things to them.
If you ask any creature on this planet,
they will all say we are the most miserable creatures on the planet.
Yes or no?
At the same time,
most people around the world say they believe in God
and all God’s creations are equal and this and that and all those,
you know, you heard all these stuff.
Now what is the good thing?
There is no such thing;
everybody is in pursuit of their happiness.
You must understand
Do you know what is the highest title for a man in Tamil Nadu in ancient times?
What is the greatest man in Tamil culture means,
‘Aayiram Yanai Konnavan’
that means ‘one who has slain a thousand elephants is the greatest man’.
Veerappan got half way there
but we said he is a criminal and we shot him dead.
So what is good,
what is bad
is only contextual for those times and those societies at a certain time,
because good and bad is judged by what consequences it generates.
It is not by the action.
You people are cutting people’s bodies;
this is like murder but with good intention.
If the consequence is good it's called a surgery,
if consequence is bad it's called a murder, isn't it?
Same knife.
Yes or no?
With what intention and what consequence you create it.
So, you know about twenty percent of our time, resource and energy is spent in the prisons
in South India and also in United States.
People keep telling me,
‘Sadhguru, why are you spending so much time with these criminals?
We are all waiting, we barely get to see you’
and all these stuff.
I don’t see any criminals.
All I see is, every human being is in pursuit of his happiness.
The man whom you call as a criminal is also in pursuit of his happiness.
Only thing is he is pursuing his happiness far more vigorously than you
and you cannot blame him,
he is also giving business to you.
So it is the consequence of the action.
That’s why I said,
‘If you function with your humanity,
not fixing your actions but only looking for a consequence,
that is best for everybody’
whatever is needed you will do
and that’s how it should be, isn't it?
So instead of fixing your actions as good and bad,
if you operate out of your humanity
you are always looking for a good consequence
for the maximum number of people.
In that your actions will come out of your intelligence,
not out of your morality.
Sadhguru: You need to understand this –
what you call as myself right now
is a huge volume of memory.
Your body is a way it is
simply because of the genetic memory that it carries.
You have your mother’s nose,
your father’s complexion
and something else,
your grandfather’s something else,
simply because what you call as your body is
a complex amalgamation of memory.
A very ancient memory lives in your body.
What you call as my mind
is one hundred percent memory right now.
So you are a huge heap of memory in many ways
and memory goes into you in different ways.
Through all the five senses,
you gather memory –
what you see,
what you hear,
what you smell,
what you taste,
what you touch.
Of all these five different ways of gathering memory,
what you see
and what you touch
are the deepest forms of memory.
Especially, what you touch
creates a certain level of memory in the system.
So when you say a spouse,
you have touched
and there is a certain level of memory.
Now,
your divorce means
in some way you’re trying to rip that memory off
and that’s not going to be easy
for various reasons.
But at the same time,
the very fact that you’re going through your divorce means
you want to be finished with that memory in some way.
Maybe not erase that memory
but someone who was a spouse,
someone who was a
in many ways a part of your life,
slowly, for whatever reason,
you have begun to experience them
as a baggage that you’re unwilling to carry.
So,
you want to keep the baggage aside
but you find the baggage is not something
that you voluntarily carry,
it is something that compulsively sticks to you.
So when whatever sticks to you compulsively,
if you try to rip it off,
there will be pain.
See if you can get rid of your mother
from your system.
You will see it’s impossible.
So similarly,
memory has built up about your spouse,
you can’t just get rid of it just like that.
If you do it –
even mentally, psychologically,
if you’re equipped to do it –
you will still see the whole system
will go through a certain level of suffering, invariably.
Even if emotionally,
psychologically, you are in a balanced state
that you can deal with it,
the system will go through a certain process.
You will see that
especially when you are
taken away from your spouse
either through divorce or death,
you will see the memory within your system plays up
much more strongly when they are not here.
Particularly, when death happens,
you will see the memory of your spouse works
in every cell in your body,
if you have lived long enough together.
It is not just an emotional and psychological process,
it is a very physical process.
So divorce is a
a voluntary death.
You have decided to kill something
that is a part of you, in some way.
It is because of this reason,
that having this understanding of the existence
and the way the system functions,
that they always told you,
“Till death do you apart,
you will not part”
because there is a physical memory about this
and the body doesn’t have the balance of the mind.
The mind can decide and turn around
but the body cannot turn around.
The more memory you build into it,
the more confused it becomes.
So, one type of memory,
body handles it much better.
Now that you’ve chosen to divorce –
for whatever reasons,
which I don’t want to delve into –
if it could be avoided, that would be best.
But for some reason,
you have come to that situation
where this is
this has to happen -
you need to understand this,
that divorce essentially means
you have chosen to kill something, which is a part of you,
because what you call as myself
is just a certain volume of memory.
Now, to
how to conduct this gracefully?
Most people think
the best way to conduct a divorce is
immediately jump into another relationship
and another relationship of the same kind.
No,
you will cause much more struggle
and turmoil within the system by doing that.
It’s extremely important
the body has enough time to work out the memory,
the body has enough time to keep the memory at a certain distance.
Otherwise,
you will render yourself to a space,
where to make yourself peaceful and joyful
will become an extremely hard thing to do in your life.
So conducting this process gracefully and well
is important
as it is important to conduct every aspect of your life
gracefully and well.
Now,
two people,
who have shared their emotion,
their body,
their sensations
and their living spaces,
ripping it apart is
because two memories have merged in many ways,
ripping it apart is almost like
tearing yourself apart.
Even though you might have begun to
almost come to a place,
where you can’t stand the person anymore,
still it hurts,
simply because
you’re trying to rip out a memory, which is you,
because you are a bundle of memory.
If one does the necessary spiritual sadhana,
if one does sufficient inner work
to establish these energies,
which is yourself
You’re only divorcing your spouse,
you need not divorce yourself.
But you need to understand this,
you have already divorced yourself.
You’re quite divorced from your own self.
Your existence has been nurtured
by making a bond,
a partnership
or a bondage –
depending upon how you’ve conducted this –
to make yourself feel whole in some way.
Most partnerships of this nature are made
because by yourself you would feel insufficient,
incomplete.
But that’s not how life is.
This (Referring to oneself) is a complete life process by itself.
It does not need any assistance from outside.
So now that you’ve some to such a situation,
it is time to turn inward and see.
It is time that you find
the completeness of what this life (Referring to oneself) is.
It is time you discover that
this being (Referring to oneself) is a complete being.
It does not need any external assistance to be the way it is.
To conduct our life in a society,
we may need
we are interdependent.
But the fundamental existence of this (Referring to oneself),
the balance of what this is,
the space of what this is,
the possibility of what this is,
is a complete process by itself.
Our interdependence is only
according to our external requirements
but our inner existence is complete by itself.
You’re divorcing your spouse, which is bad enough –
do not divorce yourself from yourself.
Vinita Bali: So, without further ado, I want to start off by asking you, Sadhguru,
what is the next step for Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Dinner.
Vinita Bali: Dinner (Laughter/Applause)? I thought that was already over.
So, we expect a more profound answer from you (Laughter).
Sadhguru: It’s a very profound answer (Laughter)
because you can postpone many things in your life.
You can postpone buying a home,
buying a car,
you can postpone your wedding if you want
it's a good thing (Laughter)
you can postpone your divorce,
good to postpone your death.
But you can’t postpone your dinner (Laughter).
Right now, this is the ugliness, which is happening in this country.
A whole lot of people are postponing their dinner today.
This is the horrible situation that’s happening.
So, do not consider dinner as not so profound, it’s very profound.
If you are eating ten times a day, it’s not profound.
If you are eating once or even twice a day,
it is quite profound (Laughs).
Vinita Bali: So, you say something which is, you know,
which is very close to my heart, you talked about dinner. We
Sadhguru: No, no, dinner is about my stomach,
not my heart (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Okay. We’ll… we’ll get to the heart through your stomach (Laughter).
You know we live in a world of contrasts,
at least as I perceive it. You know,
there is obviously the rich and the poor,
there are the ones who are impoverished and the satiated.
You know, we live in a country where three hundred million people go to bed hungry every night.
How do we deal with these big social issues
and what is the one message that you would like to give to all of us,
where we as individuals can make our own little, big,
whatever contribution to being part of the solution,
rather than waiting for somebody else to do something?
Sadhguru: Now, you’re immediately getting into the missionary mode (Both laugh).
Vinita Bali: We can try a little bit of that.
Sadhguru: Yes, it’s a serious problem and an unfortunate problem
because we are living in a land,
which has over 12,000 years of agricultural history,
probably the only place on the planet like this.
As far as I know, except a few other places in South America,
nowhere else on the planet was agriculture organized 12,000 years ago.
So, we have enormous experience of agriculture,
which means the science of producing food,
and we are living in a land where twelve months of the year,
you can grow what you want.
Many farmers in Tamil Nadu take six crops.
Four crops actually but in between the inter cropping,
totally six products they are taking out of the same piece of land.
Vinita Bali: Right.
Sadhguru: Nowhere else on the planet this is really possible.
In spite of this, half the people are hungry,
simply because of apathy,
not because of lack of food,
not because that it is not possible to fulfill this.
I feel a focused effort,
in a matter of five years
five to eight years,
very comfortably, we can crest this.
It should not even take that much time
but if we are determined, within five years’ time,
it is possible to cross this
and it’s important to cross this
because when you say India,
I know lot of poetry has been written about
how beautiful it is,
our mountains, our rivers, our whatever.
But for 1.25 billion people,
you neither have enough mountains nor rivers nor land nor even a piece of sky,
believe me.
The only thing that you have is people.
If these people are well-nourished,
competent,
inspired,
this can be the greatest miracle
but right now, sixty percent of India’s population,
even their skeletal system has not grown to full size
or in other words, we are producing a totally underdeveloped humanity.
If your body does not grow to its full size,
neither will your brains.
There’s medical evidence to show that first four years of your life,
if you did not get the necessary nourishment,
your brain is approximately sixty percent of what it should be.
So with half-brained people,
the next generation,
what nation are you going to build?
You’re going to be a big disaster.
If you don’t fix nourishment,
we are going to be an enormous disaster.
It’s waiting, it’s a silent bomb, it doesn’t make noise.
Very quietly, it’s going to implode upon us.
So, this is something that has to be fixed on a war footing.
Must be!
Vinita Bali: So, what is the role?
I know all of us as individuals have a role to play.
We are all part of a corporate,
an academic institution,
part of a community and a society.
So, what do you believe is the responsibility?
I’m not talking about corporate social responsibility.
I’m simply talking about corporate responsibility
when it comes to being part of
fixing some of the problems that you’ve just spoken about?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) I’ve… You know, we are very much involved with
nourishment, education, health of the rural populations.
I’ve been talking to many leading lights.
Not much light out there (Laughter).
Whenever I speak to a lot of people
not all of them, many of them
if I tell them, “You know, we are planting hundred and fourteen million trees,
you could do something”,
they’ll say… they’ll tell me a very passionate story,
how they… his wife or his mother has a trust
where she planted one hundred and eight trees around their factory
and how they have grown, how beautiful they are and how it’s
how they are enjoying it. In all this passion,
I just (Gestures)… okay, what’s there to say.
Hundred and eight trees are good, I’m not saying no,
but if your capacity was only hundred and eight,
I am… I’ll bow down to you.
Your capacity is hundred and eight million, not hundred and eight,
but you are satisfying yourself with hundred and eight.
You talk about nourishment,
you say, “You know what? My maid’s children, they were so malnourished.
Three of them, every Sunday, we feed them” (Laughter).
These kind of stories I’ve heard of great compassion and love (Laughs).
So, there is a whole culture of doing something for your satisfaction
or doing something because you want to buy a ticket to heaven.
I want people to come to a place where
you being fulfilled should happen within you.
If you want to go to heaven, please leave (Laughter).
But if you want to be a solution, there’s another way to work.
I fed two children and I feel very happy.
It’s all right, I appreciate that,
I’m glad for those two children but this is not a solution,
this is only for satisfaction.
So, it’s time at least those people who are in a certain level of capability,
I would say
When I say capability, all of you will thinking,
“Oh, okay, some big corporate leader.”
I’m saying all of you are in a certain level of capability,
who should see how to bring a solution,
not do something for your silly satisfaction.
You can be satisfied by eating food,
by simply sitting quietly,
by sleeping well,
doing whatever.
Satisfaction need not come through somebody else’s suffering.
You don’t have to fulfill your satisfaction because of this
You know, somebody is suffering,
that is not the basis of your suffering
and if you buy a ticket to heaven through that suffering,
I don’t know, heaven will turn into hell for probably for you (Laughs).
I hope it does (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: The business of introducing Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev,
who’s been described in many different ways in my profession,
by people from my profession,
we’ve called you a maverick, (Sadhguru laughs)
we’ve called you a monk on a motorcycle,
we’ve called you a glamorous, flamboyant guru
but for your devotees you are simply Sadhguru.
And yet Sadhguru,
at a time when
faith seems to be in collision with
so many other questions that come up as a matter of individual liberty,
I think this will make for a very interesting and important conversation for our times,
so I would like to thank you for being part of this conversation.
Let me start with the spiritual
and I hope what you say today is also addressed to the skeptics.
I count myself among a skeptic,
who if told that another human being possesses some sort of godly power,
I would perhaps as the first instinct, not believe it
but what I find interesting about what you’ve s
some of your sayings, as captured by Arundhati Subramaniam in this book,
is that you’re actually saying that
what we experience beyond our five senses,
anything that we experience beyond the five senses can be called God,
can be called power or can be called yourself.
So if God doesn’t necessarily exist,
why do we need gurus,
why do we need Sadhguru (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: Do you drive in Delhi?
Barkha Dutt: Do I drive?
Sadhguru: Mhmm. (Indicating agreement)
Barkha Dutt: Unlike you (Sadhguru laughs)
I have a fear of wheels (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: So if you drive in an unknown terrain
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: …you use these days a GPS.
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: Usually, a strange woman will tell you,
“Turn right,” you turn right.
She says, “Turn left,” (Laughter) you turn left.
She says, “Make a U-turn,” you make a U-turn (Laughter).
Why?
Simply because you are
you’re not familiar with the terrain.
When you are in an unfamiliar terrain,
it is sensible to take instructions. (Laughter/Applause)
Barkha Dutt: So are you
Are you saying gurus are the new GPS (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: Not new, not new,
long time ago we’ve been. (Laughter/Applause)
For a very long time, way before the GPS came (Applause).
GPS means what – Guru Positioning System. (Laughter/Applause)
Barkha Dutt: But you know, I have to say that while I don’t drive,
I’ve often sat in the car and heard that girl’s voice on Google Maps
and often Google Maps
Sadhguru: You can actually, you can actually
Barkha Dutt: …does not… does not adv
does not give you the right advice.
Sadhguru: You can change it to a man’s voice if you wish.
Barkha Dutt: Okay (Laughter/Applause).
This beginning of this conversation perhaps underlines that you are atypical.
You are atypical of what we imagine gurus to be.
We expect people who don’t crack jokes,
we expect people who don’t have a zest for life.
Somehow, all of our spirituality has traditionally been centered around giving up,
around abstinence of some kind,
around abstaining from pleasures,
from denying creature comforts.
Why do you believe that the material can co-exist with the spiritual?
Sadhguru: It’s… It’s not that I believe,
it’s only because you have a body which is your physicality,
you have a life within.
If you did not have a body,
if you’re disembodied,
I’m not going to talk to you (Laughs)
because with disembodied beings you don’t have conversations, okay?
I know people
Barkha Dutt: People do talk to ghosts.
Sadhguru: People are trying to do that these days (Both laugh).
Because they’re not on talking terms with the living (Laughter/Applause),
they choose the dead (Laughter)
because you can make the dead speak whatever you want.
The living will speak what they want, it’s a big problem (Laughter).
It’s a very serious problem in a conversation
because I will say what I want to say
if I was dead, you can make me say whatever you want to say.
Barkha Dutt: But can an
Sadhguru: Because you can do both sides of the conversation.
Barkha Dutt: But if your philosophy
you hate the word philosophy I know
if your technology of Inner Engineering
and we’ll talk more about that in just a moment
is available to all of us to, in a sense find strength within ourselves,
Sadhguru,
then does that mean that the atheist and the agnostic and the skeptic
can also embrace spirituality?
Is Inner Engineering only for those who believe
or is it for anyone (Sadhguru laughs) who asks questions?
Sadhguru: The previous question is a loaded one, still not answered fully.
Barkha Dutt: Yes, I know (Sadhguru laughs), I haven’t
I haven’t given up on it yet (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: Coming to this,
see you’re putting atheists and agnostics and skeptics together
it’s a wrong classification.
Atheists and theists are together, they’re one kind.
Barkha Dutt: Because they both have certainty.
Sadhguru: Both… Both believe something that they do not know.
Both are not sincere enough to admit that they do not know.
This is the biggest problem.
The biggest problem in the world is
people are still not straight enough to come to a place,
“what I know I know, what I do not know I do not know”
because they have not realized the immensity of “I do not know.”
“I do not know” is the basis of longing to know
and seeking to know and the possibility of knowing.
The moment you destroy “I do not know,”
you destroyed all possibilities of knowing.
So this is atheism and this is theism,
they’re not different,
they’re in the same boat,
they pretend to be different.
One believes positively,
another believes negatively
but they both believe something that they do not know.
One (Fumbles) person, a well-known person in the country
who goes about claiming he’s an atheist all the time,
one day comes up to me,
somebody just introduces me first time,
I said "namaste'
He says, “Do you know, I believe there is no God?”
I said, “I don’t even believe that” (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: Do you mean Javed Akhtar (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: I… I’m not
Barkha Dutt: That was a good imitation,
so I guessed (Laughter), it wasn’t difficult.
Sadhguru: I am not (Laughs) taking names,
I am saying the thing is you also believe something,
you don’t seem to understand that.
The most important thing is to come to this place of
being utterly straight and sincere with life –
what I know I know, what I do not know I do not know.
If you come to this much,
if you closely pay attention to everything around you,
you will see with all this scientific exploration,
we do not know even a single atom in its entirety,
that’s the fact.
Barkha Dutt: So what is it that you know Sadhguru (Sadhguru laughs)?
Why are millions of people your devotees
because you just said that honesty…?
Sadhguru: They usually don’t
Barkha Dutt: …is about admitting
Sadhguru: They… They don’t claim that they are my devotees, you know.
Barkha Dutt: What do they say then?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Barkha Dutt: What do they say then?
Sadhguru: Usually they claim they’re meditators,
volunteers, and stuff (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, volunteers then (Sadhguru laughs).
But there must be something they think that you know
because you just said that life is actually about admitting what you don’t know.
The corollary to that is there are things that you do know.
We do know we’re sitting at the Habitat Center Amphitheatre at this moment in Delhi –
that we know.
What beyond this Sadhguru, do you know and what do you not know (Laughter)?
I’ve asked you like is there a question of
Sadhguru: Now, what do I know?
I don’t know anything except this one (Referring to oneself).
I know this piece of life from its origin to its ultimate.
Everything that I need to know about this life, I know.
And I see every other life is actually the same thing,
if you look deep enough.
So in that context,
because today modern science is coming to this,
there is a… a theory which is evolving,
which is called as constructional theory
what they are beginning to say is
whether it’s an amoeba or a grasshopper or a earthworm
or a bird or an animal or an elephant or you or me
or the whole cosmos,
the fundamental design is same.
It is only a question of complexities and sophistication of the same design.
So this is something always the yogic science has been saying,
that if you know… you know anda you know pindanda, (Laughs) you know?
If you know the atomic, you know the cosmic
because the fundamental design is same,
it’s only a question of complexity and sophistication of what’s happening.
So fundamentally, if you know this piece of life (Referring to oneself)
you know everything by inference.
Barkha Dutt: But when you say this piece of life, do you mean yourself,
do you mean this moment,
what do you mean by this piece of life?
Sadhguru: You are a piece of life, aren’t you?
Are you life or
are you media (Laughter)?
Barkha Dutt: Are they mutually exclusive?
Sadhguru: No, no, because people (Sounds like: are/have?) mediums,
that’s why I’m saying (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: I would hope I’m a flesh and blood person
unless somebody knows better (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Flesh and blood you gathered, isn’t it?
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: What you call as my flesh and blood,
you slowly gathered over a period of time.
If this much accumulation of flesh and blood,
this much impressions have to be gathered,
there must be something more fundamental, isn’t it?
Barkha Dutt: Do you think of yourself as a yogi, a mystic or a guru?
Sadhguru: I’ve not wasted time thinking about myself (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: What would you rather be thinking of?
Sadhguru: I don’t think usually.
Really.
For me, see th… This whole thing,
because of the type of very mediocre education that’s being delivered today,
we have raised thought to heaven unfortunately.
Thought is a simple thing.
I know this is against everything that you believe in
because you are also a believer (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: No.
Sadhguru: Believer in thought.
Barkha Dutt: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: I believe in being able to ask questions.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: That’s what I do for a living.
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughter)! That’s good.
Barkha Dutt: So I must believe that it is possible to ask questions.
Sadhguru: You… you ask questions for a living,
my life is full of questions (Laughter/Applause).
Now… now the thing is what you call as thought
is coming from the limited data that you have gathered from the experience of your life.
Every person is the same thing.
How much ever we have gathered,
it’s still too small compared to the size of this cosmos
and the way the phenomena of life is happening.
From this limited da… data,
you can recycle things and generate thought.
Or in other words,
nothing new ever happens.
Same permutations and combinations of the same thing will go on forever.
The essence of what we’re teaching in the name of Inner Engineering is
to engineer yourself in such a way,
every moment of your life is a new possibility.
If it has to become a new possibility,
what is needed is perception.
When I say perception, people think opinions.
No, I am talking about perception,
as you see here (Gestures),
similarly enhancing your perception so that you perceive life.
Right now when we say thought, emotion,
we’re talking about expressing life.
Expression is not so important,
once in a way we can express
but perceiving it is important
because this phenomena is too fantastic,
it’s not a small thing.
The greatest phenomena that’s happening here is life itself.
So if you want to know this phenomena,
the only way you can know,
the only doorway for you to know life is yourself.
See, right now can you see me?
Barkha Dutt: Yes, I can.
Sadhguru: Can you
Can you use a finger and point out where I am? (Barkha Dutt gestures towards Sadhguru)
Oh, you’re wrong.
You know I’m a mystic from South India (Laughter/Applause).
Now this light is falling upon me, reflecting, going through your lenses,
inverted image in the retina, you know the whole story.
Where do you see me now?
Barkha Dutt: Still in the same place.
Sadhguru: No.
Barkha Dutt: I do.
Sadhguru: You see me the way I’m projected in the firmament of your mind.
You cannot see me here (Gestures) in the very nature of your visual apparatus.
Where do you hear me right now?
Within yourself.
Where have you seen the whole world?
Within yourself.
Now if there is a grasshopper here,
he doesn’t see me the way you see me,
he sees me differently.
He sees the whole world differently.
Now you… you can think, “Oh, he’s no good.”
This is the fundamental problem that we think his perception is no good.
No, no, his perception is very good for his survival.
Your perception is very good for your survival
but it’s not good enough to know the nature of life.
Barkha Dutt: But I
Sadhguru: So now, “what do I know” means I have enhanced
enhanced my perception the way it is important
to know the nature of life,
not just for survival.
Barkha Dutt: But if Inner Engineering as a spiritual technology is something that works,
I ask you again,
why do we need gurus? Because
that means the answers are within us.
Sadhguru: You’re speaking so much language,
did you learn A, B, C, D
Barkha Dutt: I think so.
Sadhguru: Do you remember when you’re four years of age,
that damn “A”, how complicated it was?
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: two versions to it.
You had to write it a hundred times to get the damn “A”.
Today you can close your eyes and write.
So it doesn’t matter how simple something is,
without a certain guidance,
could you have picked up A, B, C, I’m asking?
No.
Similarly, when something new you have to approach,
if you don’t have the right kind of guidance,
you won’t pick it up.
Barkha Dutt: Tell us a little bit about yourself.
Your story is well-chronicled
but what is of interest to people is that you started off as
Sadhguru: I haven’t read that book,
I don’t know,
I hope she’s written nice things about me (Referring to Arundhati Subramaniam’s biography of Sadhguru called “More Than a Life”).
Barkha Dutt: She’s written a very brilliant,
Arundhati’s… Subramaniam has written a very brilliant,
very brilliant book.
Sadhguru: No, she’s brilliant
but what’s she written about me (Laughter/Applause)?
Barkha Dutt: One of the things that she has said is that
you give great space for dissent,
you like a good argument,
that you’re not an… you’re not one of those dictatorial gurus (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: I don’t know where is a dictatorial guru,
I think the… most people have not met a guru,
they have just seen calendar images and made conclusions.
I don’t think they have met any genuine guru.
There are a whole lot of people who should have been temple priests
who are good entrepreneurs and they’ve become gurus today –
that’s different, okay? (Laughs)
Barkha Dutt: Temple priests
Sadhguru: No, no, see
Barkha Dutt: … who have become good entrepreneurs.
Sadhguru: No, I’m saying
Barkha Dutt: Just another word of
way of saying they’re charlatans.
Sadhguru: That’s a strong word.
Maybe that’s enterprise (Laughter).
I am not a enterprise.
So because I am not an enterprise,
I want everybody to ask whatever the damn question they have,
it doesn’t matter how ridiculous or how intelligent,
how nonsensical it is, it doesn’t matter.
If the question means something to you,
it means something to me.
It doesn’t matter how brilliant it is,
if it doesn’t mean anything to you,
I am not willing to listen to it.
Barkha Dutt: But you’re saying that many,
many people are… who are positioning themselves as gurus
are really only elevating themselves and fooling people. I’ve
Sadhguru: (Laughs) No, I didn’t say
Barkha Dutt: Okay, I’m saying that.
Sadhguru: I’m saying (Laughter)
Barkha Dutt: But
Sadhguru: (Laughs) The thing there is there is a vacuum,
somebody is trying to fill it.
Barkha Dutt: Yes. And Sadhguru, you have been
Sadhguru: Are they qualified to be that?
Questionable thing.
Barkha Dutt: But a very genuine concern
and you have been on some of my television programs
where we have spoken about this –
is whether god-men are often con-men?
And how does this lady here (Gestures towards somebody) know the difference
between who’s a god-man and who’s a conman
and is a human being capable of being a god-man?
Do you think of yourself as a god-man?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Why are you underestimating that lady (Laughter/Applause)?
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let it be my question (Sadhguru laughs).
How do I spot the difference between a god-man and a con man
if I don’t even believe that humans can be godly?
I think humans can be brave and wonderful and inspiring and
But I don’t think that they have magical powers.
Sadhguru: See, did you ever see God having magical powers?
Barkha Dutt: No, I’ve never seen God.
Sadhguru: No, then why are you saying he must have magical powers (Laughter)?
So first of all,
this god-man is essentially a media-coined word.
Nobody claims that he is a god-man, okay?
Some are goddamn men, that’s different (Laughter).
Nobody
I don’t think anybody has personally claimed,
“I am a god-man.”
I have not met anybody like that.
Now, that is a
That’s another kind of profession,
putting labels on everybody, you know (Laughs).
Leaving that alone, what is it?
This is a culture - you must understand this,
it’s unfortunately all mixed up today
this is a godless culture, you must understand this.
There has never been an idea of a god in this culture.
Only in competition with what came from outside,
because we saw they could rule us,
they were dominant and we thought we have to imitate their ways,
we also started making it up to some extent,
not successfully though.
Yes,
but we know the technology of god-making.
When I say technology
We are using the English word “god”
but that word doesn’t exist in India,
here we call them devas.
What a deva means is
see today media is projecting Tendulkar as a cricketing god.
It’s very appropriate to this culture
because if somebody excels beyond a certain level in any field
he may be a sportsperson,
he may be a warrior,
he may be an artist,
he may be anything -
if he excels beyond what normally average human beings think is possible for them,
he goes,
they recognized him as a deva
and he’s worth looking up to
because he becomes a guiding light for them.
That’ll anyway happen, whether you like it, you believe it, you don’t believe it.
Barkha Dutt: Sure.
Sadhguru: In every field, somebody rises, he becomes the light for the rest of the people.
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: So similarly, in the inner spaces
When I say the inner spaces,
the quality of your life is not determined by what kind of house you live in,
what clothes you wear,
what car you parked outside,
what things, jing-bang happening around you,
no,
this moment how joyful, peaceful, blissed out you are within yourself.
Now if I sit here,
we’re sitting here in the same space,
breathing the same air,
probably we ate the same kind of food
I don’t know what you eat (Laughter)
but if I sit here now with my eyes closed,
the way I am within myself,
I will not exchange this (Laughs) for anything in the universe.
Now, when people see, no matter
The number of things I’m managing is insane.
Everybody thinks,
“Sadhguru, is it possible? You must go crazy someday.”
All volunteers, over three million volunteers,
enterprises, businesses, okay, projects, mega-projects on the street,
all kinds of activity going
around the globe.
If anybody has to go nuts, it’s me, okay?
Because all run by volunteers.
Run by volunteers means
nobody is trained for the job
and you can’t fire them for inefficiency because they’re volunteers (Laughter).
All right (Laughs)?
And anytime, they come in anytime and do great things,
anytime they’ll walk away, all right?
And nothing should collapse.
Till now, I must tell you this,
as we are sitting here, this day,
probably little over three hundred and odd programs,
Inner Engineering programs are happening in the world.
Never in the last thirty-three years,
one program has been abandoned or has failed (Applause).
That …that takes enormous management
but nobody will ever see me getting angry or miserable or tensed out or stressed out.
Barkha Dutt: You’ve never lost your temper?
Sadhguru: You want me to now (Laughter) (Laughs)?
Do I look like I’m incapable of that?
It’s not that,
it’s not that I’m incapable of anger,
it's just that I have never given that privilege to anybody.
I’ve not given this privilege to anybody –
they can make me happy,
they can make me unhappy,
they can make me angry,
they can make me miserable,
no.
I kept (Applause) these privileges to myself.
So people
you’re talking about miracles or whatever.
People ask me,
“Sadhguru, everybody… in very ashram, miracles are happening.
You are beating all the miracles down.
If we say something happened,
you make us look like fools.”
No miracle.
I say, “What? You want me to pull a pigeon out of my pocket” (Laughter)?
If I pull a pigeon
Barkha Dutt: But there are
Sadhguru: No, if I (Laughs)
Barkha Dutt: …gurus
Sadhguru: If I
Barkha Dutt: …who claim to do that,
who have been challenged by rationalists
Sadhguru: No, I’ll come to this.
If I pull a pigeon out of my pocket,
I have a shitty pocket (Laughter)
and you have a bird (Both laugh)
what are you going to do with this?
You come to me, I will show you the miracle.
I have thousands of people,
who are working seven days a week,
sixteen to eighteen days… eighteen hours every day.
In the last two… five-ten years,
not a single moment of irritation, agitation, anger in their life.
This is a miracle (Applause),
this is a miracle we want to manifest.
You don’t want a miracle?
Barkha Dutt: I agree, this is a miracle.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: And not that pigeon.
Do you have a pigeon in your pocket (Sadhguru laughs)? Okay (Laughs).
Sadhguru: I told you I don’t like a shitty pocket (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: I know (Laughter). Now, you were thirteen
In Arundhati’s book,
I read that you were thirteen when you first quite accidentally discovered yoga.
You were children playing in
at the bottom of a well, that’s what the book says (Sadhguru laughs).
Tell us, how did you discover yoga?
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs). I told that because that’s how it happened to me,
I said that to her,
I don’t know how she’s written, I’ve not read it (Barkha Dutt laughs).
I said that to her because I want people to understand
the nature of the universe is,
even if you do… for the wrong reasons,
you do the right thing, still it works.
If you do the wrong thing even for the right reasons, it still doesn’t work.
People need to understand this
because the whole world has invested on goodness.
The goddamn goodness is killing the world.
There’re too many good people
and these good people are the biggest problem.
It’s always a good Indian who wants to fight a good Pakistani,
good Hindu wants to fight a good Muslim,
good American wants to fight with just about anybody (Laughter).
The more good you are,
the more fighting you are.
The more good you think you are,
because goodness is always in comparison
Barkha Dutt: Don’t forget the good journalists
who promote these fighting everyday on channels (Laughter).
Sadhguru: I… I think… because your goodness comes
by comparing yourself to somebody.
If you were alone on this planet, you wouldn’t know
whether you’re good or bad.
What we need on this planet is sensible human beings.
Little more sense we could do with, isn’t it, for sure,
in every aspect of life?
Engineering essentially means
you could have built this structure whichever way you want
but you’ll have to keep looking up,
when it’s going to crash on your head.
Engineering means you put it up in a sensible manner,
the way it stays, without anxiety about it.
Similarly, Inner Engineering means you engineer yourself in such a way,
you can go through the process of life
without being anxious about your suffering
“What will happen to me?”
There is no such thing because you engineered yourself well.
Whatever the hell happens around you,
within yourself you are the same thing.
So every time I launch one mega-project,
you’ll say, “Sadhguru, if it doesn’t work?”
If it doesn’t work, what (Laughs)?
If it doesn’t work, what?
If everything that I’m doing, if nothing works, I will still die blissfully.
This is guaranteed.
I want to make sure it’s guaranteed for every human being
so that they can live their life without the fear of suffering.
Right now, instead of seeing how suffering should go,
people are busy romanticizing suffering.
The moment you romanticize suffering,
it’s very clear you are not interested in human well-being,
you like drama.
Barkha Dutt: Hmm. You often spoke about
how economic leaders are going to be the future of the world,
you’ve been interacting with CEOs.
It’s rare to find a spiritual guru who’s also quite openly capitalistic.
Are you a capitalist?
Sadhguru: What is that?
Barkha Dutt: Who believes that wealth creation is for the greater good (Sadhguru laughs) of people and society.
Sadhguru: See, a whole lot of people are attached to poverty right now
because without poor people,
without hungry people they cannot survive.
I am not one of those.
I want to see that… six hundred million people on… in this country
are postponing their dinner tonight.
But we are postponing major decisions in the Parliament every day, all right?
I am not a part of that,
I want things to happen because I know what it means to postpone a dinner.
I don’t want that to happen to pe… people.
Children are postponing their dinner tonight,
probably a hundred million children in this country have postponed their dinner to tomorrow
and that’s not a joke.
So, these jokers who identify themselves with this or that
are going on playing their joke on the people,
every day.
So capitalism is an ancient word, it no more exists.
We are talking about a market economy.
When only a few families had access to capital, it was capitalism.
It is no more capitalism.
Any… If you have a good idea
and you know how to execute it,
there is capital for everyone, all right?
So, we have tried communism,
it’s a wonderful idea but that must happen willingly.
If you enforce it, it’s the ugliest thing.
We have seen it
We have seen a major demo on the planet,
when a… most ugly things happened, you tried to enforce it.
Karl Marx might have known lot about economy.
You know, I was… I… When I was fifteen,
I was all gung ho about Engels (Referring to German social scientist Friedrich Engels) and Karl Marx and stuff.
But he did not understand human nature,
I realized that when I was sixteen.
Thirteen, fourteen, I was all fired up reading up all the communist literature from Russia (Laughs)
but by the time I was sixteen,
I realized these people don’t understand what is human aspiration.
Without understanding what’s human aspiration,
you try to build a society,
you try to build a nation, it’s a disaster, okay?
Cruel disaster.
But maybe it will work when really a country or a society is in total dumps.
You have to force it out.
When you have to force it out,
it works
but after that it won’t work.
In a way, if you come to the ashram
nearly four thousand people are living in the ashram –
well, you can say it’s communist but by willingness,
it’s not by, “Okay, I did so much, so I get so much” – no.
Everybody gets what they need.
So this is not enforced, this is by choice.
If by choice you’re willing to share, how fantastic it is;
but “I have nothing, you have something, I want you to share” - how ugly it is!
Barkha Dutt: What is it with Sadhguru and motorcycles (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: These days,
I’m on four wheels (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: But you haven’t given up (Sadhguru laughs) your love for bikes or have you?
Sadhguru: It’s just that when I was
I started, you know, trekking in the jungles when I was ten, eleven.
I would be gone.
If I had ten rupees in my pocket,
I would organize my food and I’m gone with this little note in the house.
I can imagine my parents (Laughs)
I… I always wished I shouldn’t have a boy ever (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: Girls can run away too on bikes.
Sadhguru: They run later (Laughter/Applause).
They don’t run at ten, eleven (Laughter).
And they’re on a pillion
they’re usually pillion and if they find a good rider, no problem (Laughter).
I’m saying the thing was,
it’s not about the motorcycle or this or that,
it is just that I was a cloud of million questions all the time
and wherever I looked, nobody had a sensible answer.
Everybody has standard answers that they’ve heard from somewhere,
nobody has a genuine experiential answer.
So there’s a restlessness to explore just about anything.
When I was ten, eleven years of age, I would be gone into the forest
for three, four days.
Once food ran out and I couldn’t survive, then I would come back.
So, initially lot of excitement
but later on they kind of settled down,
they knew I’ll get back.
So when I became fourteen, fifteen,
I cycled across South India,
not because I was one cycling enthusiast,
not like today,
wearing a helmet and suited booted for cycling – no,
simply I cycled because cycling is little faster than walking.
The moment I became seventeen,
I still didn’t have a license but I found a motor to my cycle,
which became a motorcycle (Laughs).
So that because it went little faster.
It s… it supported my restlessness to know something I didn’t even know what the hell it is.
I didn’t know what I was looking for
but I had questions about anything I looked at.
Everything in the universe looked like a question mark to me.
Barkha Dutt: But the question about the motorcycle is really to ask
whether the motorcycle, the Land Rover or Land Cruiser, which one is it now?
Land Rover, Land Cruiser, (Sadhguru laughs) I’m not sure,
but whatever, the four wheels, the helicopter, you
I think you once said somewhere that I like
that whether if it moves on land, water or air, I like it.
Sadhguru: This is not
One thing is I like anything that works and machines work (Laughs).
The more efficiently (they?) work, the better they are
and why it’s important is, after all,
what is the quality of an individual human being?
How smoothly and how efficiently your body, mind and everything functions
is the quality of a human being, isn’t it?
So machines always excited me,
whether it’s a s… bicycle or motorcycle or because of you know
lack of the necessary… probably the fitness that I was at that time,
I crisscrossed India on a motorcycle,
today it would be hard, so you get into something little more comfortable.
Barkha Dutt: But you know while that makes you a very interesting character to observe,
did you ever worry that you’d be labeled or dubbed a Richie Rich (Referring to the cartoon character) person’s guru?
This is you know… This is the Sadhguru who
Sadhguru: See, the thing is
Barkha Dutt: …flies his own planes
Sadhguru: No
Barkha Dutt: …who likes his BMW,
who like his game of golf,
who likes having a little Frisbee match on the ___ (Unclear)
Sadhguru: (Laughs) L… Let’s… let’s come to that.
See, the thing is I would
I wouldn’t mind
I even… Sometimes we… I… I ride a bullock cart,
nobody reports that though (Laughter).
I… I… I love to handle the bulls and
I… I still drive that sometimes.
But now you… I want to have a conversation with you,
this afternoon till two o’clock, I was in Jodhpur,
I could have come by bullock cart or a camel cart, (Laughter)
you had to wait for five days (Laughter/Applause).
I came on time, you must appreciate that (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: So it’s about efficiency is what you’re saying?
Sadhguru: Yes. So I l… I personally learnt to fly a helicopter
where I don’t have the time for these things
but I somehow fit in this and learnt because
seventy percent of our work is in rural India.
Tch, I thought this little helicopter could just
I could set the place on fire
because I’m half the time stuck
Half my life, I’m on the road stuck in some traffic driving myself.
All the time, behind huge
everywhere… there’s no place in the country where there’s no traffic jams,
believe me. Even in rural India, there’re traffic jams.
So I thought a helicopter would really revolutionize our work.
I picked up the thing, I got my license,
FAA license but in India it’s so difficult to get the license
because many of these rules were made before Wright brothers (Referring to the brothers who invented the airplane) came (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: Well, according to some,
the plane was also made before the Wright brothers came (Laughs).
They say it was made in the Vedic ages, they
Sadhguru: They're not very wrong.
Conceptually, it was made.
Whether physically they built or not,
we don’t have proof for that. Conceptually, there’s no
Barkha Dutt: Conceptually, it’s about imagination to think
that you can move from place A to place B
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
You cannot conceptually imagine something entirely.
Even if you imagine,
you must be able to produce some
You must understand the principles in some way, as to why something flies.
If you don’t understand why something flies, it’ll be like that you know once it happened,
a little turtle, very… with great effort,
climbed a tree, went to the edge of a branch and jumped, fell flat, lot of pain.
Slowly, again he crawled up, in another two days, again up, jumped, fell down, again up, fell down.
After a few days, two birds who were sitting in the opposite tree,
they were talking and they said,
“I think it’s time we tell him he’s adopted” (Laughter).
All right (Laughs)?
So I’m saying what cannot fly,
you cannot make it fly.
People thought in detail, as to what can fly,
what cannot fly,
conceptually they thought.
Whether they built or not, we don’t know.
And is it… is it… I mean, it is an established fact,
they calculated the speed of light.
Somebody, some individual cannot calculate the speed of light just like that
if there was no whole scientific culture around him.
No individual will just drop from heaven and calculate the speed of light, okay?
There must have been a scientific culture,
otherwise it won’t happen.
But we need to understand there is a difference between science and technology.
Barkha Dutt: But there’s also a difference between science and mythology.
Some things are just great stories
that doesn’t mean they actually happened.
Sadhguru: See for example,
there are… there are images or there are sketches which show,
which probably somewhere between three to four thousand years ago were made,
where it clearly shows a turtle and a round planet sitting on it and going around.
Turtle is the best example,
best analogy for a planetary movement
because a turtle cannot accelerate (Laughs).
same speed, he just keeps going.
So a round planet on a turtle
is the best way to describe how a planet moves around.
And the very word for geography in this country is bhoogol,
which means it’s a round planet.
So it is not because of Galileo we know it’s a round planet,
we’ve always known.
How do we know?
We can’t know just one scientific fact and not know the other aspects related to it.
So this thing about anything Indian, beating it down, is because
one thing is that culture has evolved because half the people,
their brains are in Greenwich Mean Time,
they’ve still not gotten out of the 1948, whatever happened.
We struggled for independence, we came out,
not just to send them out but to be who we are.
So, that problem is still there
and now there are upstarts who claim all kinds of things.
There has to be an even balance,
not beating down this or pumping it up in a (an?) unrealistic way.
But you cannot deny Indian mind has thought about things
that nobody had thought about in those times.
There is no question about that.
But there is a distinction between science and technology.
Science can evolve because of certain intelligence,
technology needs material manifestation.
Now we are trying to claim technology, which we should not.
If we just focus on science,
many things will be attributed to India for sure.
Barkha Dutt: We live in times when faith and spirituality have become very inflammable
Sadhguru: Don’t put them in the same basket.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let’s talk about faith first.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement).
Barkha Dutt: We live in times when faith for certain has become a very inflammable,
easily politicized conversation.
If faith should have been personal today, it’s not.
Today you actually have decisions taken in the name of somebody’s faith being injured.
So you mentioned food right now,
I read somewhere that you said there’s nothing religious about the act of food,
just eat what you like.
Sadhguru: No, no, no, I didn’t say that.
Barkha Dutt: Eat what’s good for you?
Sadhguru: I said eat what’s good for you.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, eat what’s good for you.
Sadhguru: It’s a very different thing (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: I correct myself (Sadhguru laughs) – eat what’s good for you.
But today we have a highly politicized conversation around banning beef in the name of faith.
How
Sadhguru: It’s definitely not good for you to eat it.
Barkha Dutt: Beef or any meat?
Sadhguru: I’ll come to that.
Finish it, finish the question.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, okay. So I’m offering that as one example of
how I see a politicized conversation taking place around faith.
How do you reconcile the faith of a large number of people
with questions of individual liberty?
I know I have read that you like books written by Salman Rushdie.
We were the first country to ban him again in the name of faith.
How do we reconcile faith with individual liberty?
Sadhguru: See, it’s always been said “faith moves mountains.”
Yes, but it freezes your mind.
But the greatest crime you can do on this planet is to move a mountain.
You should not move a mountain, it should be where it is,
it has not just dropped from somewhere,
it’s grown because of various forces functioning in a particular way,
phenomenal activity has happened to build a mountain.
You should never move a mountain
but (Laughs) people with frozen minds always want to move a mountain, okay?
Having said that,
when we say faith,
it’s an import for this culture.
We have never had faith in this culture.
You must look back little beyond thousand years
since we’ve been under occupation.
Here, we have been told always, “Your life is your karma.”
Karma means action.
Whose action? Your action.
So what we are saying is your life is entirely your making.
There is no someone sitting up there and managing this for you.
This is entirely yours
but for every action that you perform
whether physical, mental, emotional, energy-wis
whatever kind of action you perform, there is bound to be a consequence.
If you’re ready for the consequence, do whatever.
If you’re going to cry about the consequence, control the action right now.
Based on this… Now you came to food,
see the food consumption has been looked at very carefully in this country.
If you just bring this back, the world will be healthy, do you understand?
Here, we have identified different type of people,
what they should eat.
If you’re doing menial jobs, how you should eat.
If you’re doing trading, how you should eat.
If you’re into spiritual process, how you should eat.
If you’re into education, how you should eat.
Why this is is each person needs a different type of building of the body.
You want to run hundred meters next to Mr. Bolt,
what kind of food you should eat.
You just want to work in Delhi, what kind of food you should eat.
You want to think in a certain way, what kind of food you’d… you should eat.
For all these, we have very clear prescriptions.
Now when it comes to food,
what it means is, we are taking another life, whatever that is
it may be plant life, animal life, whatever
you’re taking another life,
ingesting it and you have to make it your life –
that’s the whole thing.
What is your life, what is that life, if you look at it,
all life on this planet is coming from the earth.
This body is also the same soil,
this is also same soil,
if there is a earthworm, that is also same soil
but see how it has become, how this has become,
how that has become.
If I give you… You like a mango or a banana?
Barkha Dutt: Mango.
Sadhguru: Mango. I know, (Laughs) you’re ru
you’re ruling the state right now (Referring to the Aam Aadmi party
Now, if you eat a mango, this mango becomes a woman in you.
If I eat a mango, the same mango becomes a man in me.
If a cow eats a mango, the same mango becomes a cow in the cow.
Why is this happening?
There is a certain information or software in you
whatever you eat it transforms it into a woman.
If I eat, it transforms into a man.
If a cow eats, that becomes a cow.
So every life is happening the way it is happening
because of a certain dimension of information
or in modern terminology, let’s call it software.
There is a certain software, which is an arrangement of information.
Now, the idea is to eat as simple a software as possible.
If you eat that kind of life, which is a very simple software,
your ability to override that software and make it entirely a part of you is very good.
As that software gets … complex,
more and more complex,
your ability to integrate it goes down.
So, especially if it’s a creature which has some sense of thought and emotion,
if it has emotion, then you should not eat it.
This is the understanding.
An animal, which has any emotion,
displays certain emotions
especially if it displays emotion which is near to human emotion,
you should not eat it
because it will not integrate itself.
That animal nature will start manifesting itself.
Or in other words, in India,
today maybe in cities people do not know,
you see in the villages,
people have very intimate relationship with a cow.
They have drunk the milk of that cow,
their children are drinking the milk of that cow,
there is a very deep relationship.
If you do not know this, cow is one creature,
if something happens to you and you are in some kind of grief or misery,
you don’t have to be near the cow,
wherever the cow is in your house,
it will … it’ll start shedding tears for you.
You know, I’ve seen this with my eyes, I couldn’t believe –
when somebody is dead in the house it… what does a cow know,
it is somewhere, simply tears flowing.
So when it’s… has such deep emotions,
if you kill it, it’s like killing a human being,
it’s murder or it’s cannibalism.
So because of that – this is not a faith thing,
this is not a religious thing,
we thought this is a fundamental sense.
Why… When we are hungry, why can’t I cut you up and eat you?
What’s wrong (Laughter)?
What’s wrong, I’m asking?
Barkha Dutt: But what you’re saying should be about many more animals than just the cow.
Sadhguru: Yes, yes of course.
Barkha Dutt: And when it becomes about only the cow,
then there is a… there is certainly a perception
Sadhguru: I… It is not
Barkha Dutt: …that it is a political decision or a religious decision.
Sadhguru: No, no, I am not talking about the… whatever the laws that are happ
Barkha Dutt: This is not about people getting up and saying,
“It’s cruel to be… to be a meat-eater.”
That would be a different argument.
Sadhguru: Hmm, I am not even talking about cruelty.
Even cutting a plant is cruel, in my experience
but you have to do it.
But if you are conscious of it, you will do it to the minimum possible extent,
not do it wantonly, that’s the whole thing.
Now, about this political ban about cow slaughter or whatever,
this has many things.
One thing is there is a sensitivity,
once you drink milk from the cow, she is like your mother.
Killing your mother and eating her up is something
people cannot digest in this country.
Still eighty percent of the people belong to that category
and they’re… they’re hugely
there’s a huge emotion,
such a emotion, which because they’ve always been made to be docile in a certain way,
they have not violently… reacted to it
but in some places it has happened,
in villages and other places.
There is already a beef ban in many villages just by norm,
not by any law, that you don’t bring these kind of… things into the village.
I am not saying you must ban it or not ban it.
I am saying the sensitivities of your population, you
without considering, you can’t go do this blatantly.
Because it is growing,
it’s becoming a growing business;
India is becoming a major exporter of beef, that’s not right.
Even if somebody ate something, it is up to them,
it’s their personal taste, whatever
but now you’re promoting it and you’re making it grow.
There is serious concern but our people don’t express it,
our people don’t go out on the street and not going to kill anybody
because they killed a cow.
So ban is not what is needed,
more education was needed rather than banning.
Barkha Dutt: But you haven’t spoken to what happens when faith
Faith repeatedly seems to come into conflict with individual liberty
by the banning of books.
There were people killed in Paris
because they were seen to have mocked,
you know of the Prophet Mohammed and so on.
Sadhguru: See
Barkha Dutt: So where does this end?
Where do we stop violence and politics in the name of religion?
Sadhguru: If you… If you want that to stop, you must understand this.
You’re saying, “Today, today.” It’s not today.
In the last 2,000 years, this is the history of the world,
continuously it’s happening all over the world.
Barkha Dutt: So is that bombers are a new phenomenon?
Sadhguru: Well, you’ve forgotten about the Crusades and the other things,
which have not been reported in history (Laughs).
Hundreds of millions of people have been killed in the name of god, all right?
It’s new to us here, but even here,
thousands… hundreds and thousands have been slaughtered in northern part of India
just because the faith that they belonged to when the invasions happened.
Nobody writes about it because we never took the pen and wrote,
somebody wrote history for us the way they like it.
Because all history is sponsored by kings,
they wrote the history the way they want
and they said they are great emperors
but what they did was absolutely terrible.
So you need to understand, faith is a new thing to us.
When I say new,
in this country which has 12-15,000 years of history behind us,
1,000 years is new for us,
we’ve still not come to terms with it;
we’re still struggling with it.
But struggling within ourselves,
not creating a struggle on the street because that’s not our nature
because here always we’ve (it’s?) been drilled into us,
whatever you do there’ll be a consequence for you.
Even if you come back another life, another life, it won’t leave you,
it’ll come back to you. Tch, this has been told
This controls people, this is a
This is a tremendous technology, please understand this,
and it’s not simply a fake thing, it is a real thing.
Everything that you think, feel, act, there is a consequence.
Not because there is somebody thinking he must give… gift
give you a reward or a punishment.
It happens in your own chemistry.
Barkha Dutt: How do we keep faith,
which you say is new to us, separate from politics?
You have… You have, in the past for example,
I remember when Anna Hazare was lodging his anti-corruption movement,
you did come and applaud it
but you said that the Lokpal was not some magic wand,
I remember you saying that.
Do you believe that we are seeing a dangerous cocktail of faith and politics
getting more and more mixed up?
Sadhguru: See, it is happening,
I’m not saying no
but it’s much less than ever before.
Barkha Dutt: Really?
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: It seems to be much more than ever before.
Sadhguru: No, that’s because of you (Laughter/Applause).
That’s because
That’s because if… if ten people get beheaded in some remote part of Iraq,
you make sure the blood spills into my sitting room,
because of that.
Otherwise, you’re sitting here now,
today… Let’s say 1,000 years ago,
we were sitting here,
1,000 people got killed in Iraq,
we will sit here peacefully thinking world is going really great,
(Barkha Dutt laughs)
spring-time (Laughter),
everything is nice.
So, this is because the dissemination of information,
if ten people get killed somewhere, it’s a huge thing
because it comes into our sitting rooms, bedrooms, dining room,
everywhere there is a television,
so it pours into our homes,
so it is happening.
So, this is good because even a small thing looks magnified now in people’s experience
but this has been happening always.
It’s happening at its lowest level now.
Here and there it spurts up, which needs to be controlled for sure.
But what I see is,
for the first time,
for the very first time in the history of humanity,
even if you
the numbers are not qualified
because the population has increased,
even in terms of percentages of people,
how many people can think for themselves today is huge
compared to what it was a hundred years ago or five hundred years ago
or 1,000 years ago or 10,000 years ago.
All these centuries,
there would be one man in the village who thinks for you,
who reads for you,
who writes for you.
You just have to do what you have to do, simple things.
Today, everybody is able to think for himself or herself.
Now, human intellect is blossoming.
I do not say it is blossoming in the right direction,
with the right sense,
no,
insanely it is blossoming.
It doesn’t matter, insanity will happen for some time,
people will come to their senses.
When something is new they’ll go crazy, after some time they’ll come to senses.
Once human intellect blossoms sufficiently on the planet,
then this looking upward for well-being will not make sense,
believe me.
Right now, from looking upward,
slowly the world is tilting for
In pursuit of human well-being, people were looking heavenward,
still many are, that’s different,
but a whole lot of people have started looking outward.
So if you look heavenward, hallucinations will happen,
wars will happen
because my heaven and your heaven different, you know?
None of the heavens have anything for women,
you better know that (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: I am definitely going to hell (Laughs). Anyway
Sadhguru: So you believe in heaven and hell (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: I was being facetious,
I was being facetious.
Sadhguru: Let me finish this.
Barkha Dutt: I was being facetious.
I don’t know if there is somebody up there.
Sadhguru: That’s fine, that is fine. I
Barkha Dutt: Is it a force, is it energy, is that inside me?
Sadhguru: No, I’m saying this
This thing about looking heavenward is slowly going away
and in pursuit of well-being, people are looking outward.
This is ripping the planet apart.
Human pursuit of well-being is just destroying the planet.
Now, the fundamentals of what we are transmitting
The fundamentals of this culture,
which is essentially rooted in the yogic culture,
what you call as Indian culture or Hindu culture is essentially a pure yogic science.
In the form of culture,
it finds many colors and distortions,
which is what you’re seeing as the Hindu culture or Indian culture,
whatever you want to call it.
Barkha Dutt: But they’re not interchangeable terms.
Sadhguru: Why?
Barkha Dutt: Because we’re (Sadhguru laughs) a multi-religious country with many different cultures.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) We have…. I want you to (Laughs)
I want you to understand the word Hindu does not signify a religion.
You ask them do they worship one god if they are Hindus.
In the same family, they’re worshipping twenty-five gods (Laughter).
They don’t
They don’t know which is the god,
so they’re making sure worship everything (Laughter).
Just in case something will hit, okay (Laughter/Applause).
Now, the word Hindu means the land between Himalayas and Indusagara.
This land, this subcontinent is Hindu.
All people who are born here are considered Hindu
because it’s a geographical identity.
I know there’s a whole political issue, if I speak like this,
they say, “Oh! He’s Hindu.”
Barkha Dutt: No, I mean people will tell you you’re echoing the RSS (Referring to a political party) chief (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: I don’t know what he said, I have not
Barkha Dutt: He said all Indians are Hindus and there was a huge
Sadhguru: Okay, I am not
Barkha Dutt: …political outcry over that.
Sadhguru: Okay, all Indians live between Himalayas and Indian Ocean (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: That’s okay.
Sadhguru: Those who want to jump into the ocean
Barkha Dutt: That’s okay (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: If you live … See, this is a dialectical culture,
it expresses things in a certain way.
Between Himalayas and Indian Ocean if you live, you are a Hindu.
If you jump into the ocean and cross, you are a Lanka, okay (Laughter/Applause)?
So, I don’t know what is the struggle about this.
This is because there is such a narrow understanding of this.
This is the debate which we have to change in the country
because somebody has absolute belief systems,
we are trying to compare that
to a culture where there is no such thing as belief.
We have not ever been believers,
we’ve always been seekers.
This is a land where the highest value has never been God,
always liberation,
mukti
freedom is the highest goal.
God has never been the highest goal (Applause).
So you… you put this in the same box as something,
which just believes this is it or you’re dead –
unfortunate,
that’s not the way to look at it.
This is what we have to bring back. If we really value human freedom,
you must bring back this seeking for liberation.
“I want to be free, not just from others but from myself and my god and my heaven and everything”
because God has never been the goal in this culture,
God is just another tool.
When I use the word tool for a god,
people get very hurt.
They say, “Sadhguru, don’t say that, it hurts us.”
I say, “That’s okay, you come to the ashram,
I’ll give you some plumbing job (Laughter), all right?” See
Barkha Dutt: That’ll hurt more (Laughs).
Sadhguru: No, no, no. “No spanner, no winch, nothing.
Use your fingers, nails, teeth, whatever.
Three days later, nails will be gone,
half the teeth will be gone.
Then I will give you a spanner.
Will you worship the spanner or no” (Laughter/Applause)?
We are who we are
As… as human beings,
we are who we are
only because of our ability to use a tool.
Otherwise you are not even good as a dog.
You can’t even fight a dog, isn’t it?
Barkha Dutt: So you’re against organized religion?
Quite clearly,
if god is just a tool and
faith is not the same as spirituality
Sadhguru: (Overlapping conversation) No, I… See… No, no, I’m not… I’m not saying I’m against this or that.
All I’m saying is I want human beings to come to this much
if you know something you know it,
if you don’t know something you don’t know it.
Everything that you do not know you believe –
this is a dangerous thing.
Now, the fight on the planet is
not between good and evil, this and that, no -
one man’s versus another man’s belief.
I’m saying why the hell do you believe anything?
Because you’re essentially not straight enough to admit,
“I really don’t know.”
“I don’t know” people can’t fight.
I don’t know, you don’t know – can we fight?
“I know” is a fight.
“I do not know” is never a fight,
“I do not know” is a way of seeking.
If we do not establish this seeking in every human being,
that every human being is longing to know
whether outside or inside, whatever,
you are
Because this is the nature of human intelligence,
it can’t sit quiet.
It can only sit quiet if you freeze it with belief system.
If you seal it with belief system, it can sit quiet.
Otherwise the very nature of this intelligence is it wants to know.
Barkha Dutt: Okay, we’re almost at the end so I think I’m going take a few questions.
Just two-three minutes of questions.
I’m seeing lots of hands go up.
The lady behind you,
yes please.
Questioner: Namaskaram. Sadhguru, in one of your videos,
you say that the problem with the world is that
most people lack the intensity.
Sadhguru: ___ (Unclear-what?)
Questioner: Most people lack the necessary intensity.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement)
Questioner: And then you say the way is dhyana.
So intensity is more associated to fierceness in personality
and dhyana is more associated to calmness.
So they’re somehow counterintuitive.
Can you elaborate a little?
Sadhguru: People think peace means rest in peace (Laughter)
because their idea of peace is death.
Peace can be very intense.
Peace can be tremendously intense
because peace means the reverberations of life have become subtle and intense.
Action means reverberations of life are not so subtle,
it is at a certain level.
So peace happens not because
Peace may happen if somebody is dead
but to be alive and peaceful means
you need to be highly intense state of energy,
otherwise you can’t be peaceful.
The reason why most people who don’t have any problems as such,
you know after all they’re trying to earn a living,
reproduce and bring up their children and die one day,
just for that they’re freaking simply because of lack of intensity.
Because life is happening at a low ebb,
naturally everything is a problem.
If it rises a little bit, suddenly you have a little clearer view of everything.
For this, you need a higher intensity of energy within you
and the yogic system is essentially focused towards that.
Dhyana does not mean (Gestures) (Laughter). No (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let’s take the next question,
here, right here in the front row, yeah.
Questioner: Sadhguru. What I get from Isha’s philosophy,
if I may say there is, is
that you need to see internally,
in your interiority,
you need to fix it internally before fixing your external situations.
But is it also not right
is it also not very important to do the right thing externally, you know?
Just to make myself more clear you know,
if I be more precise
Sadhguru: No, no, I’m clear, I get the question (Laughter).
Why, do I look so dumb (Laughter)?
Questioner: Let’s say you know, if somebody
Sadhguru: I got it.
Questioner: Yeah.
Sadhguru: I got it.
Questioner: If somebody is born
Sadhguru: I got the question (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: (Laughs)Isha’s philosophy is not about looking internally or externally.
It is just that if you’re looking for mangoes,
you look up the tree,
you don’t dig the earth, all right (Barkha Dutt Laughs)?
But if you’re looking how to plant a mango tree,
then you dig the earth.
You’re looking for mangoes if you dig the earth, will you find it, I’m asking?
So if you… inner things- you must look inward,
outer things-you must look outward.
There is no such philosophy –
“Look out or look in.”
Wherever the damn thing is,
look there (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: Like you know, Shankaran Pillai went for a job interview (Laughter)
and they asked him,
“Which is further, Mumbai or moon?”
He thought profoundly and then said, “Mumbai.”
They said, “How do you say this?”
He said, “I can see the moon, I can’t see Mumbai” (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, last question, yeah.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru. I just want to ask
Barkha Dutt: Hold the mike closer to you.
Questioner: Yeah. I just want to ask you that
everybody’s perception of good and bad is different
and what do you think if we start manifesting our own good and bad,
what’ll be the state of the society?
Sadhguru: Hmm, maybe you won’t have power tonight (Barkha Dutt Laughs).
I think I already made this clear.
The biggest problem with the world is there’re too many good people,
not enough sensible people.
Sense is life-specific, okay?
Goodness need not be life-oriented,
goodness may be going to heaven.
And the moment –
I want you to understand this dangerous concept,
people don’t address this –
the moment you believe
suppose I believe there is heaven and it’s a beautiful place
and you can live in the company of gods,
should I send you there today or no?
If I really care for you, I’m saying (Laughter).
Yes?
If I really care for you and if I believe there’s a great place,
should I send you there or not?
This is a dangerous thing, do you understand?
If you stretch it to its logical end, it’s a really dangerous thing.
The moment I believe there is a fantastic place up there,
I really love you and I want you to go there, you know (Laughter)?
Tch, yes (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let me just end by asking you something that we haven’t spoken
about and then I’ll hand it over to Chiki.
You said you love machines.
Sadhguru: I didn’t say I love them (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, you like machines.
Sadhguru: I
Barkha Dutt: Or they’re useful.
Sadhguru: They work.
Barkha Dutt: Have our lives been overtaken by gadgets?
Sadhguru: Not mine.
Barkha Dutt: No?
Sadhguru: Definitely not, I use all the gadgets
but they don’t overtake me.
These are fantastic things in our life.
Things… See, in every way,
compared to how a human being was, let’s say hundred years ago,
you’re almost superhuman.
Tch, hundred years ago, if I could just pick up something from my pocket
and talk to somebody in America right now,
I would be superhuman.
Why superhuman?
If I said “I’m God” people would have believed me,
hundred years ago.
Five hundred years ago, if I just had a light bulb,
I would have become God on this planet,
I want you to know. Look at the things we have today,
we are really superhuman.
Once this kind of capability has come to us,
little more sense has to rise,
little more awareness and consciousness stu
has to arise.
If this doesn’t happen,
this capability will turn against us.
This is what you’re saying.
Now gadgets are freaking people. Why?
It’s a simple thing.
You… If you want to use it, you can use it or you can keep it aside.
Because you are in a compulsive state,
if you start using a cell phone, you can’t stop it,
even in your sleep you’re texting.
See the boy is (Gestures towards somebody)
he’s in a… he’s not with me… he’s in… looking at me in the screen (Laughter).
Now, this is the same thing.
If food is good, if you start eating you don’t know when to stop.
If you start drinking, you don’t know when to stop.
If you start doing something, you don’t know when to stop.
The same thing, it is not about the gadget,
it is not about the food,
it is just that there is not enough consciousness,
there is compulsiveness.
Everything is happening compulsively.
Instead of addressing the root, you’re trying to kill the gadget.
Gadget is a fantastic thing,
every damn gadget has enhanced our life in a huge way, isn’t it?
Don’t curse the gadgets.
It is just that compulsiveness has to go.
Barkha Dutt: Well, on that note, I will say thank you for provoking us.
As always, a pleasure (Applause) to have you,
a pleasure (Sadhguru laughs) (Applause).
Let’s have a big round of applause for Sadhguru here (Applause).
If you invent it , that's called a Lie!
Truth is not something that you invent
Truth is something that you realize
lie is something that you invent
so, you don't have to say truthfully naturally
what is naturally is truth
so
should one follow the precepts
of the past
or should one come to something new
there should not be a compulsion about breaking the rules of the past
nor there should be a compulsion that you must only do it the way of the past
it is important
that every generation looks at
What is really needed , What is not needed
if you do not discard the garbage that you develop in your house
after sometime
your whole house will be a garbage bin
isn't it
everyday you must throw out the garbage
then only the house is clean
similarly in our life
many things that don't work we must throw them out on a daily basis
if we don't do that
as a culture
if you don't do it for hundreds of years
then you become stagnant
when you become stagnant
nothing works
right now
if we are constantly looking for better ways
of doing every aspect of our life
I am saying from the simplest
if you just start looking
what is the best way to sit?
invariably you will come to me
you will want to learn yoga
if you start looking what is the best way to breath?
I'm saying these are vital things
what is the best way to eat?
what is the best way to manage my body?
if you just start thinking like this
you will start doing yoga
that is , you will start approaching
your physical and mental well being
in a scientific manner
similarly what is the best way to interact?
between two neighbors
if you look at it
truthfully
then you will arrive at a science
what works best at the neighbors
rather than trying to weave a philosophy around it
so
the philosophies of the past
also
might have been sense at one time
which turned into a kind of a precept over a period of time
then it turned into a law
then it turns into a belief system
then it becomes into religion over a period of time
instead of that
we have to come to our senses about everything
but , will we arrive at ultimate answer for everything?
may be not
because changing realities are there
so, one way I'm looking at life is
first and fundamental thing is
there is substantial scientific and medical evidence to show you
that your body
and your brain will function at it's best
only when you are joyful
so first thing is this
that you have a body and brain which works well
you have a functioning brain
if this has to happen
you must be in a pleasant state of experience
so first thing is to become joyful by your own nature
if you manage this
you have a functioning brain
have you noticed this?
when you are happy
you find solutions
when you are unhappy
you create problems
have you not noticed this in every situation in your life
so this is important
the first and basic thing
this is not done
people think, pursuit of happiness is to be achieved
you must be successful towards the end of your life
no
this is the very first thing
that you are joyful by your own nature
now you have a functioning intelligence
which is not encumbered
by any compulsions
you are in pursuit of happiness means
you are encumbered by all kinds of compulsions
and joyful means
you are not encumbered by aything
now you can look at things just the way they are
only if you see things just the way they are
not from a prejudiced mind
simply the way they are
then you will also come up with solutions everyday
better and better solutions
if you cannot even see what is there
because
you have prejudiced opinions about everything
then
how a solution will come?
when you don't even figure the problem
How will you come with a solution
Sadhguru: When it comes to these aspects of life,
terminology is not a question of semantics.
When you say “I am a confused soul,”
a soul cannot be confused.
You are a confused mind.
Why is it so important to correct this?
Because if you do not understand the distinction between
one thing and the other
suppose you go to a doctor
because you have a cardiac problem
and you say “Doctor, my liver is giving me trouble,”
he will attend to something else, you know.
Isn't it?
So it's very important.
It is not a question of semantics,
it is just… not just a question of splitting hair,
it's just like this
you have a heart problem but you go to a liver doctor.
This is not going to be a solution,
this is going to be more problems
because anyway once you go to him,
he has to conduct a surgery, upon your liver
whether you have liver problem or not.
That’s part of the business, okay?
So, it's very important.
Your soul cannot be confused
and first of all do not talk about a soul
because it's not come into your experience.
And if you talk about something which is not yet in your experience,
to put it very bluntly,
it amounts to lying.
So, this is the first thing you must do,
you must stop lying.
Do not talk about anything which is not yet a reality for you.
It may be said in the Gita,
it may be written in the Vedas,
everybody may be talking about it, it doesn’t matter.
It's not true for you, you do not talk about it.
You do not talk about soul,
you do not talk about heaven,
you do not talk about God
because it is not yet a reality for you.
If you do not talk about these things,
a certain longing will appear within you,
which will lead you there.
If you talk about it,
you will satisfy yourself with gossip,
the real thing will never happen to you.
You will be fulfilled with gossip.
Gossip is a very fulfilling thing, you know.
Yes.
Yes, lot of people avoid reality just by gossiping.
Whole lot of people avoid reality
just by watching a cinema.
Cinema is somebody’s gossip, isn't it?
Somebody’s story.
I am not against it
but I am saying if you are using it to enhance your life, it's okay.
If you are using it to avoid your life,
it's a serious problem, isn't it?
And a lot of people are using it to avoid life.
You know you don’t have to do anything in your life.
You go, just sit in a darkroom,
buy a bucket of popcorn
somebody will love,
somebody will fight,
somebody will live,
somebody will do everything,
you just have to eat popcorn and it happens.
You can cry, you can laugh
and you can come out and it's done
and they tell you when it's ended.
These days they don’t… they don’t put “The End” anymore.
You are supposed to figure it's over.
There was a time when they would say “The End,”
so it… just in case you are not getting it
you may sit for the next show.
So do not deceive yourself.
This is… The least you can do for yourself is
do not bullshit yourself.
If you do not bullshit others also
your life around you will also improve phenomenally
but that… that I will leave it to you. Okay?
That’s your decision
but at least with this one person
be one hundred percent straight, no nonsense.
You must do this
because this person deserves and you owe it to this
that with this one at least
I don't know in what kind of social and other situations you are,
whether you can stop bullshitting to others.
If you do that you can build a phenomenal life around you also.
If you can do it around yourself it's great,
you’ll build something wonderful.
If that is not possible at least with this one person
do not bullshit this person,
at least with this person one hundred percent straight.
this is simply because
there was a time when it… this culture was a vibrant spiritual atmosphere.
From those times,
it is a very depleted condition right now.
That vibrant spiritual liveliness is gone,
but the jargon is still floating around.
Wherever you go
people are talking about soul, atma, paramatma, this, that
the jargon is still floating around in common language and common atmospheres
though the fire is gone.
Because of this
it is… one way it could have been a positive influence,
but it is also a negative influence
because you’re talking about the highest things in a mundane way,
so that all the highest things will just die,
just talking about it like gossip.
People will discuss Gita on the teashop.
People will you know
Nothing wrong with the teashop, I am saying
not with the necessary focus or the sanctity that it needs.
Sanctity not in terms of elevating it to some place,
sanctity in terms of
if you… if you want to put your hand into the milk,
you would see that your hands are clean, isn't it?
Because, otherwise it’ll go bad.
This is just like that.
If you want to put your hands into something
before that a little bit of care,
otherwise you will become a confused soul which is impossible
but you think it's real.
Confused mind - possible.
Mind can only be confused.
If somebody has a clear mind, he must be a fanatic.
Do you understand?
The nature of the mind is confusion, that’s its beauty.
It's always confused because it can't figure anything,
but it can gather everything and mull over it endlessly.
This is the nature of your logical mind.
Mind is always going to be confused,
unless you are a single-track idiot
or you are a fanatic.
Otherwise, mind will be confused.
A confused mind is good.
If you know how to organize your confusion,
if you know how to handle your confusion,
if you know how to increase the enormity of your confusion consciously,
if you can handle your confusion consciously,
mind is a very productive instrument.
If you are looking for a mind which is not confused,
you’re… you can go for a brain surgery.
You can remove half of it, there’ll be no confusion.
Clear.
The more intelligent you are,
the more you will wonder,
the more you will be confused about everything.
The more profoundly you look at life the more confused you will be
and it's good.
Only somebody who doesn’t look at anything,
who’s got a parallel vision,
he is dead sure about everything.
So, you must either be a idiot or a fanatic
to do that
and there’s not much difference between the two.
So, now your mind is confused,
that is the nature of the mind.
You have to learn to use the confusion to your benefit.
If your mind is not confused,
that means it's not constantly receiving.
It is a blocked-up mind.
Your mind has become a concrete block
which is dead sure about everything.
Otherwise, constantly if you’re perceiving more and more information,
it is always confused because it can
it is always receiving much more than it can ever process
so much information.
Everything that you see,
if you see little more carefully
right in this room you can see so many things
that you never thought possible in your life,
do you understand?
If you observe just one thing, it will happen like this.
It is just that
people are seeing like this and they don’t see anything.
If they pay enough attention to any one thing,
you will see a simple ant can keep your focus on for the rest of your life,
it has so much in it
So, everything around you,
if you pay enough attention there is so much information,
no way can any mind ever process it.
Only an un-attentive mind thinks it knows everything.
An attentive mind is always wondering and confused about every little thing in the universe,
and that’s the way it should be.
You should not suffer your confusion.
You must understand if you’re constantly confused
that means you have a functioning intelligence.
Yes.
So once you have separated your soul and your mind
a non-existent soul in your experience
The mind is receiving too many things from every direction all the time,
endlessly,
in wakefulness and sleep.
The five senses are always perceiving endlessly.
Most people are not alert to it,
so their life becomes stagnant and boring.
Confusion means there is still a possibility.
Conclusion means it's death.
So, don’t try to conclude and take away the confusion.
Confusion is fine.
Right now, do not imagine things which are not true.
Confusion is because
never in the history of humanity
anybody ever figured the nature of creation,
nature of life in their mind.
You can become life and know life,
you can never figure life,
just understand this.
Never, ever can you figure life out,
but if you become an absolute piece of life,
you will know life for what it is.
So, the only way to know life
is to become one.
Are you one?
Are you a soul?
Are you life?
Are you life or no?
You are.
So become that.
Right now you are not a life.
You are a bundle of thoughts, emotions, ideas, opinions and prejudices.
That is more dominant than the life in you, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Your thought and emotion is occupying more space
than the aliveness that you are.
So you are not experiencing yourself as a piece of life.
You are experiencing yourself
as a bundle of thought and emotion and whatever else.
This is a wrong perception.
Because you are alive, you may think.
Do you understand?
Not because you think that you exist.
Because you are alive you may think if you wish,
but right now the thought process has become so compulsive
that people think that is more dominant
or is predominant to life.
It is not so.
It does not
Your thought does not exist before life.
Because you are alive, you may think.
Thoughts
if one’s thought is focused towards one thing in his life,
nothing else seems to matter,
such a person is free simply because of his thought,
not a confused thought process.
That thought process will not protect you,
but if one’s thought is like this
that it is absolutely connected to one thing and one thing only,
a focused thought,
such a thought can give you a lot of protection
and a lot of purpose and a lot of capability.
That’s a different thing.
But right now you are not in that state,
it's better to use a simple tool
and you don’t have to worry that somebody is going to affect you.
you need to understand
if you protect yourself,
you will also protect yourself from well-being.
Do you understand?
So the protection should be such that
only what is not necessary for you is filtered.
You need a filter, not a wall.
Yes,
if we build a wall around you,
it’ll protect you from life itself.
Lot of people are doing this.
They want to protect themselves from death and danger,
but what they will succeed is,
they will protect themselves from life
even life won't touch them,
they are so safe.
Don’t become like that.
Life should touch you.
Even if life smothers you, it's better
than remaining untouched by life.
Questioner: Pranam Sadhguru.
One of the tasks that we are given
and trying to do it is to raise the
taking care of the kid
taking care of your children at home,
but we are troubled with we
whenever we to make a decision or not to make a decision
get troubled with like what to consider
or what not to consider.
Can you give us some perspective about
something that we should think while making a decision
or not making a decision for the kids?
Sadhguru: Why are you making all the decisions for them?
Questioner: (Laughs) That’s the trouble.
I am sure that I am not the right person to make the decision,
but should that be made or not like
what do I do when I need to do something?
Sadhguru: First thing, we need to understand is
children only come through you,
they don’t come from you.
They are not your property
to be conducted whichever way you feel fit.
No, they are not.
If you treat them as your property
or your future investment -
if you treat them as such,
you are committing a certain sacrilege against Creation and the Creator
for which there will be a price.
Simply it’ll come in the form of life
or maybe it’ll come in the form of your children -
the price.
Yes,
it’ll be very unfortunate to see that.
I am saying this -
a very cruel thing to say to any parent,
but I am saying this
because it’s a very cruel thing to parent a child.
The child doesn’t need that,
but please see in so many ways,
you’re doing everything possible
to see that he remains dependent on you
in some way or the other.
You are not thinking of liberating him.
So, the moment you start working,
you want your children to be attached to you, isn’t it?
Well, you yourself open Bhagavat Gita
and read and say ‘You should not be attached,
you should not be attached’,
you tell your wife
‘See don’t be attached to me
But your children,
you want them attached to you.
So
before you choose to have children,
you must think about these things
but if already it’s happened,
now… at least now you must think about it properly, seriously.
One thing is
if you want to produce something little better than yourself to the world,
hmm?
It’s important?
If you produce a child,
it must be at least one step better than you, isn’t it?
If the same nonsense is going to happen once again,
what’s the point?
So, something better than you has to happen means
the first and most fundamental thing is
you are one hundred percent straight -
even if it is embarrassingly straight,
you’re one hundred percent straight is important.
This is something very hard for most parents
because that’s the only place where they get to boss around.
They have a committed audience in their children.
Wherever else they speak, nobody will listen to them,
children till they become twelve years of age
thirteen is dangerous
till they become twelve years of age
you have a committed audience.
You are losing that also, many of you much earlier, isn’t it? (Laughs)
Yes,
much earlier you’re losing it.
So
how old are they?
Hmm?
Questioner: Four.
Sadhguru: Okay,
there’s enough room for correction. (Laughs)
You must do this -
stop parenting them.
What they need is some good company,
not a bloody boss walking around in the house.
Yes or no?
When you were growing up, did you like it,
being talked down to?
Did you like it?
No.
So what they need is a friend,
they don’t need a bloody father and mother.
That job is already done.
Fathering somebody, mothering somebody means
biologically delivering them -
that’s been done.
Now they’re trying to become a life by themselves -
what they need is a friend.
The only qualification you have against them
or over them is
you came here a few years earlier than them -
that’s all you have.
What else do you have, I am asking?
Are you sure you are more intelligent than your child?
Are you sure?
Hmm?
What?
Participant: We are sure we are not.
Sadhguru: Yes.
So
the most important thing you need to understand,
just you came here a few years earlier than them
All you have done is a few years earlier you landed here -
beyond that, you have no other qualification to tell them
what to do and what not to do.
Yes or no?
But, the other consideration is,
if you don’t tell them somebody else
unqualified advice on the street will happen.
You only have to guard them against that
but if you have to guard them against that,
that you must have the courage to bring them up in such a way
that they don’t take any advice from you either.
You say
“What I say, you must listen,
but don’t listen to your friend.
He is telling you take a drug,
don’t listen to him.”
But what the friend says seems to be more of a pleasure
than the nonsense that you’re talking about.
That’s a fact, isn’t it?
So, it’s not going to work
If you bring up your child with a
such a fierce sense of his own intelligence and his own decisions,
then you will see,
he will seek help because
he will very easily realize
that his intelligence, his understanding is not good enough for everything.
But if you bring him up that he has to listen to your advice,
he will come up with rebelliousness.
Even when good things are said,
he won't do that -
he will do the reverse of it.
This is something that most parents are experiencing, isn’t it?
He wants to do just the reverse of it,
just to feel independent
because he doesn’t know what it means to be independent.
So, four is not bad.
Now you can start treating them
as just one more person,
not as my child, my child.
It is not yours, I am telling you.
At the most, you’ve given some genetic substance to create a body
you can’t create a life
don’t have such grandiose ideas about yourself.
You cannot create a life.
You just provided some substance
some genetic substance to make a body.
Yes?
That too you did not think about all these things -
out of your own compulsions,
you do something and they land up.
Yes?
So
understanding that a child is not your making,
it’s a privilege they come through you
enjoy the privilege,
cherish the privilege,
respect the privilege.
Do not abuse the privilege that’s been given to you.
It’s very important.
Why are you brought up this or that?
You are supposed to grow up as a human being, isn’t it?
It is just that most people never create an atmosphere for people to grow,
they’re brought up the way you want them to be,
not the way they should be as life.
If you are not ramming up nonsense into their head,
they have a tremendous sense of observation
and observation naturally pops up a million questions.
You answer as many questions as you can
the way you know it.
What you don’t know you just tell them ‘I don’t know.
My only problem is I came a few years earlier than you
this doesn’t mean I know everything.’
Admit it to your children, what’s the problem?
Yes?
You think they can’t read,
you’re not even bloody sincere about things that you’re saying.
You think they can't see it?
If you think they can’t see it,
I want you to know by the time they are ten - twelve, thirteen,
if they have some problem within them,
they don’t come to you, they go to their friends.
Why?
Because they feel they’re more sincere than you.
No other reason.
Yes or no?
You are acting like you’ll drop from heaven.
Who wants to listen to your nonsense
unless they are so bloody brainwashed by the time they are ten-twelve.
They will not listen.
Any intelligent human being will not listen to bullshit.
Yes or no?
Unless you’re brought up on it seriously.
So,
just handle this privilege sensibly, respectfully
do not abuse this privilege.
Just you have to protect them from wrong influences.
Rest, leave them free.
If you think they will anyway go wrong
that must be your own self-knowledge. (Laughs)
You are so sure of yourself
‘My children bound to go wrong.’ (Laughs)
Just protect them from
you have to protect them a little bit from wrong influences,
but at the same time, they must remain free of your influence,
which is also a bad influence.
I am saying
if you show that what you’re doing is of real worth
and you’re willing to invest your life in that,
why would your children not invest their life in it?
If you don’t show that commitment
if you do not show that involvement with life
and you’re expecting them to become wonderful whatever
no,
it will not happen
and they don’t listen to what rubbish you say.
They’re observing what you do and how you are, isn’t it?
So, if you want to raise children,
please raise yourself -
don’t worry about the children
just raise yourself into a wonderful human being,
make yourself that,
it will reflect.
It cannot go wrong, but there’s no guarantee. (Laughter)
Like in… everything in life,
there’s no guarantee
because there may be some other stronger influence on the street side, isn’t it? (Laughs)
Young leaders that you've seen where have been the susceptibilities the vulnerabilities that over time they can work their way through
Maybe giving them a little bit of guidance. Now can help I think the biggest problem
With the so-called leaders of the days is
We are not really producing leaders. We just producing managers and supervisors
They come out as leaders and they suffer every [moment] of their life. This is what I'm saying
because
leadership
Doesn't come because of your ambition
leadership happens
So let's understand this
Ambition means you're tweaking up your desire
which is waste of time because
your desires are based on what's happening around you or what has happened till now an
Exaggerated version of what's around you is your desire?
You can't desire something that you're not seen you only desire something that you have seen
Mildly exaggerated or overly exaggerated it depends who you are
but
leadership is [about] being able to take a group of people or a
Nation or the entire world
In a direction and to a destination that they have not imagined [possible]
If it's something that they could imagine they don't need you
they need a leader because
he should be capable of taking them to a place where they themselves cannot imagine possible?
For this a leader needs a profound sense of insight
When I say [insight] that you're able to see something that other people cannot see
People are interested in doing things
But they are not interested in working upon themselves
If you believe that what you're doing is important the most important thing your life is to work upon yourself to
[enhance] your perception skills to be able to see
What others cannot see you have an insight into what you wish to do?
It is not even a question of what do I wish to do it is a question of what is most needed right now
Because if you do what's needed?
Only then [it's] leadership if I do something that's fanciful to me then there will be nobody behind
Because this is all about me
so the young leaders
The most important thing is that you don't tweak your desire in the name of ambition you tweak your competence
If you keep on tweaking your competence
Depending upon the times in which we live
opportunities that come up in front of us naturally [you] will fall into the
Rhythm of what is there if you have an enormous competence?
Then I don't think the world can put you down


Sadhguru: If… If every day if one’s life,
if every hour and moment of our life,
if it has to be a forward movement,
if it has to be a process of growth and not stagnation,
it is important that
we are in constant communion with that which is the ultimate truth.
In identifying ourselves with limited aspects of who we are,
we are identified with many things.
If you
I have seen in the families, sometimes
different people have different plates to eat.
In case you change the plates and give, there will be a big argument.
The plates don’t taste nor can you eat them.
It neither tastes good nor does it nourish you (Laughs),
but the plate –
‘This is my plate; I will not eat in your plate’
a very important thing.
So anything that you touch,
anything that you sit upon,
anything that you set your eyes upon,
you get identified.
What this means is
let's say you don't know how to drive
there are many people who are doing this,
particularly I see two wheeler drivers,
you will see their brake light is always burning
because they got the brake half down
and their one leg is down.
This man is heading for a big mess. (Laughs)
If you want to ride,
both your legs should be up and your leg should be off the brake unless it's needed.
Have you seen people going around with the brake light on, all the time?
Because they got the brakes, because they think it's safe to keep the brakes down.
As you get identified with this thing and that thing and that thing
you’re throwing your anchor,
hoping your ship will go somewhere.
It’ll only sink.
There’s only one place it can go.
Not like this (Laughs), it can go only like this. (Gestures)
So Sathsangatve Nissangathvam means
what these four lines are trying to tell you is just this,
that if you’re in communion with truth,
your associations will be just associations, not attachments.
You will know involvement in life,
but you will not know entanglement in your life
because
not because it's right or wrong,
with brakes on if you try to go somewhere, you will burn yourself up
and then you think life is a miserable thing.
Yes,
if you have brakes fully on and try to drive,
it is… driving is a miserable process,
no question about that.
So if one has to constantly be on the move,
if one has to let his life fly, not crawl;
if one has to evolve,
if evolution is an ongoing process for you,
if your idea of evolution is only to the extent that Charles Darwin endorsed it
that is your spine got little shorter - you know,
it used to be long and hanging out,
now it got little shorter
you can sit little more comfortably.
You don’t have to roll it up.
If that is all is the idea of evolution,
that’s one way to live
little better than a monkey,
but much more troublesome than a monkey,
much more destructive than a monkey.
If that is the idea of evolution, it's fine,
but if your intention is to evolve as an ongoing process
every day, every hour, every moment, if you want to evolve,
the brake should go off. Only then it’ll roll.
If you are driving a car or whatever,
you don’t have to keep the throttle on all the time;
if you have it on for some time and then leave it
depending upon the kind of terrain you’re doing, it’ll keep rolling.
As long as you don’t touch the brakes, it keeps rolling.
Life is like that too.
Spiritual process is like that too.
Sadhana is like that too.
You just press it and leave it;
it keeps running unless you’re braking all the time.
Whatever you see, you’re getting attached to it.
Whatever you see, you’re getting identified with it.
If you identify yourself with anything that is not you,
obviously you’re not moving from untruth to truth,
you’re moving from truth to untruth,
from reality to hallucinatory process.
In this, one will not evolve,
one will just entangle
because in this you will not know the nature of your existence.
In this you will not touch anything that is real.
The psychological drama will rise in such a big way
it will raise so much dust in your head that you can't see what is in front of you.
If a dust storm comes up here,
if… now they’ve
you know they’ve grown grass and this is not possible;
suppose a dust storm came, you’re sitting here,
Dhyanalinga is here, but you cannot see because there is a screen.
This is what is happening because
you’re constantly raising the muck
because you’re identifying yourself with things that you’re not.
The moment you’re identified with something that you’re not,
you’re moving not from untruth to truth, but from truth to untruth.
So, what is the nature of my relationship is not the problem.
The problem is that you’re identifying yourself with that.
You’re using substances other than yourself to create a sense of self.
There is nothing in the Existence which will substitute the self,
because the only way, the only and only way you can experience anything for that matter is through the self,
there is no other way.
Your very existence is self-ish –
you must separate the word. (Laughs)
Your very existence is selfish because everything that happens,
happens only through the self.
There is no other way.
So if you keep this just as it is,
it is capable of reflecting the whole cosmos for you.
If you muck it up, it doesn’t even show you what's right in front of you.
So if you are in a state of nirmoha or non-identification with anything other than what is this (Gestures),
you will come naturally to an unwavering way of being.
Once you’re unwavering in your purpose,
liberation cannot be denied to you.
There is no way it can be denied to you.
The reason why this life does not get to its natural destination is
every minute you’re changing course.
Every minute the focus of your life keeps shifting,
every minute whatever you set your eyes upon it gets identified with it.
So after some time it just does not know where to go.
It just will not know where to go.
It will be one confusing mess.
Suddenly life looks unnecessarily complicated.
The complication is only in your psychological process;
life is pretty simple.
Birth is not in your hands;
you’re just born and you have to just die one day, really.
Is anybody else making anything else compulsory for you?
Is anything else compulsory?
Birth is compulsory,
death is compulsory
in between whatever the hell you want,
simple, isn't it?
‘No, no, no, but, but, but, but, but…’
But that’s all yours.
Only two things nature has set for you,
you’re born, you have to die.
Aren’t you glad you have come with an expiry date?
Hmm?
Aren’t you glad?
Hmm?
I’m glad. (Laughter)
If there was no expiry date,
could we make you meditate for a moment?
Suppose you were immortal.
(Laughs)
Oh my God! Could I tell you anything? (Laughter)
Only because there’s an expiry date and the time ticks… ticking (Snapping fingers),
whether you live or you don’t live, whether you do something or you don’t something
don’t do something
it just keeps going because it doesn’t wait for you.
If you could halt it, you wouldn’t meditate - please see this.
You wouldn’t do anything,
because you cannot halt it, just going.
By the moment it's getting closer;
you think you’re going to get married?
I’m telling, that may happen on the way.
You’re going to die, that’s for sure.
Yes? (Laughs)
So there’s only one compulsion that you have to die;
before that whatever you do is yours.
If you just understand this much
when you were born there was no compulsions,
you could be whichever way;
only compulsion is stomach.
Once stomach is full,
there’s only other compulsion that you have to die one day.
Rest is easy, you know.
You can complicate it if you want,
but it's actually very easy. You can do whatever you want.
Such a simple process your mind complicates it like crazy, insanely crazy.
It makes it so complicated
waking up in the morning is such a complex process (Laughs),
going through the day is an unbelievably complex process.
Everything,
just everything has become so complex.
If you had to run… conduct (Audio disturbance), see?
If you have to conduct the audio system, I’m sorry. (Laughter)
If you had to conduct your breath,
if you had to conduct the rhythm of your heart,
if you had to conduct the circulation of blood,
if you had to conduct the cellular process,
if you had to conduct the chemistry of your system
oh, can you imagine,
just conduct your breath for ten minutes, let me see.
It goes all over the place.
If only if you had to conduct the life process,
I don't know what would have happened to you.
You don’t have to conduct it, it's all free.
Breath is happening, everything is happening.
Yes?
Whether you are aware or unaware it's happening.
Whether you care about it or you don’t care about it, it's happening.
See, this is on,
life just happens,
you just have to die and that also happens.
You don’t have to do it.
Just allowing everything to happen to you gracefully - that is all.
Allowing life to happen gracefully
and when death comes, allowing death to happen gracefully, that's all.
Questioner:Namaskaram Sadhguru.
My spiritual experience has its ups and downs.
Sometimes it stumbles and sometimes it's glorious.
Why this variation?
Sadhguru: Oh.
Spiritual experience is stumbling
or you are stumbling?
Questioner: Possibly me,
but I feel with all the kriya that you told me, I do it,
and it is not constant,
it is just that I am stumbling sometimes
and sometimes it's glorious, this life is beautiful,
I mean I can't even believe it could be so beautiful before I met you
Sadhguru: See, what is a spiritual experience?
Let's come to this first.
You need to understand this
this body is something that you gathered slowly.
Is that so?
Is that so?
Did you gather this?
What's that sabu…,
what's that sabu…,
aalu what do you call that?
Hmm?
That cannon ball kind of thing.
Sabu…?
Participants:Dana!
Sadhguru:Dana – so sabudana. (Laughter)
Yesterday I was telling somebody.
I was in somebody’s home and I was telling them,
my first experience of sabudana, way back in the Sahyadri mountains;
we won’t go there.
No (Laughs)
So, this is all sabudana slowly gathered.
No wonder it feels so difficult.
Now this is something that you gathered.
Everything that’s here is something that you gathered.
Your mind is a gathered phenomena –
accumulated phenomena,
body is an accumulated phenomena.
So what you call as myself is the spirit,
if you want to call it that way.
It's a very contaminated word so I generally don’t use it,
but now that you’re using the word spirituality,
it is the spirit.
So if your life is about that, then you’re spiritual.
If your life is about the body,
it is about the mind,
it is about what's around you,
we say you are material because these are accumulated things.
What you accumulate can be yours - can never, ever be you.
That much is clear to us, isn't it?
Yes?
So whether you gathered stones or diamonds or what,
they can be yours but they can never, ever be you.
So when we say spirituality,
we are saying it's about you.
It is not about furniture in the house.
You know after some time, people treat you like a furniture.
Body is like furniture for us to sit and stand, isn't it?
Yes?
Mind is another kind of furniture to do things.
So this is not about furniture,
this is about you.
So spiritual process means it's about you,
not about your furniture,
not about your property,
not about the things that you can gather and lose.
So what is the experience of that?
Let's not go about trying to describe,
this is the experience of that.
All I am saying is, it is about this. (Gestures)
So why is it
why is it that furniture is there and you are missing
because somewhere you don't know what you’re doing.
Somebody put it in a big way saying,
“They know not what they’re doing.”
A few basic things of eating, sleeping, reproduction
you’re doing it the way it has to be done.
Everything else is freaked, you understand?
So that is why what is fundamental you
to come into your experience, we have to do all kinds of circus,
hang you upside down.
If you just do life the way it needs to be done,
not the way your society has twisted you to do it,
you will see spiritual process is always on,
nobody needs to teach you,
nobody need to do anything to you
because that is you.
It is not an imported commodity.
It is you, isn't it?
It is essentially you.
Your body is imported,
sabudana or whatever,
your mind is imported. Isn't it so?
But what is you has always been there, what is there to do about it?
There is nothing to do about it.
Too much sabudana, so we have to clear it a little bit.
So right now your life has become about things that
you’ve gathered and not about you.
Because of that, it is like this.
You need to – it is no more
you know you cannot even talk about it in the world anymore
because people are recognized for what kind of car they drive,
for what kind of clothes they wear,
for what kind of makeup they wear or
nobody is recognized for what he is.
Yes?
Largely.
So don’t make it so complicated.
Yes.
Oh my spirituality, my experience, my this
don’t make spirituality like you’re growing horns.
You become simply life.
The problem with life is you’re trying to be special.
So you look stupid
Just be life,
you will see this is wonderful.
You become a body,
you become a mind,
you become a society,
you become famous,
you become rubbish,
you became all kinds of things.
Just be life because that's all you are
and that's all you can be.
You cannot be anything else.
Forget about all these big, big jargon
‘I’m spiritual, I’m this, my spiritual experience,
my ordinary experience,’
there’s no such thing.
There’s just life.
Are you on the surface;
are you moving towards the core?
That's all.
Questioner: Could you please say something about insomnia?
I’ve been suffering insomnia for nearly six years.
So, could you give me some feasible instructions?
Sadhguru: Insomnia may be occurring for various reasons.
There are some people who are sleeping well
but they don’t know that they are sleeping well (Laughs).
There are some people who are not able to sleep well
because maybe their body needs a certain amount of rest
and they believe it needs more,
so they are just working themselves up.
I’ve met so many people who are quite okay,
but they think they are not sleeping enough because
doctor’s prescription of eight hours, they are not sleeping,
they are sleeping only four hours. They are well, it’s okay.
If you’re well, you are not sleep deprived
and you’re sleeping three-four hours a day, it’s perfectly fine,
that’s a good condition to be in.
Or there are people who are unable to sleep
because of their psychological situations.
There are certain people who are not able to sleep
because of their cellular or genetic situation.
Only if you are like that,
it’s a… it’s a hard thing to fix, which you are not, okay? (Sadhguru Laughs)
You are not genetically in that state.
Or in a cellular way,
your body cells will not allow you to sleep for some reason,
there are many reasons as to why.
So, if you’re not able to sleep,
I think you should join our garden department (Laughter).
Entire day, ten hours a day you work outside (Gestures),
you’ll fall asleep (Laughs),
very...
If that doesn’t work,
the simpler way is,
if you get initiated into Shoonya meditation
The Shambhavi should do it.
For most people, Shambhavi does this.
If it did not work for you,
if you’re initiated into Shoonya mediation,
you will see it’ll correct the… the sleep disorder,
if there is a sleep disorder.
You’re looking quite fine and happy.
And if you are happy not sleeping, it’s great (Laughter).
Yes, because sleep is death.
Every day, people are dying for six hours or eight hours or four hours.
What’s your choice?
Less death or more death per day?
Participants: Less.
Sadhguru: Less death is good, isn’t it?
Only if it’s causing health problems,
you’re distressed,
then … See, if you’re going like this at work time
that your machine is not smooth
Sleep is a kind of lubrication tool for the system,
not enough sleep means everything becomes frictious within you.
So, if such frictious situations are happening,
there are things to do.
One thing is there’s Chandrakund here,
stay there fifteen-twenty minutes every day,
you will see the body will cool down,
it’ll be well-lubricated
and you will see the frictious nature of your mind and body will go.
Afte… If that is gone, how long you sleep is not a issue,
not at all.
Not every human being needs to sleep for the same period of time,
it’s a very wrong notion.
Different people need different levels of sleep
and one aspect of yoga
or one focus of yoga is to how to reduce sleep
because sleep is skipping life, isn’t it?
People say, “I enjoy sleep.”
Nobody can enjoy sleep.
You enjoy the restfulness that sleep gives you.
There is no way to enjoy life (sleep?)
because in sleep both you and the world are obliterated,
that is if you are really sleeping.
So, early morning 05:30, you’re pretending to sleep -
that may be joy, that may be a pleasure, I understand that (Laughter).
When the bell is ringing,
you are just pretending to sleep – that’s a pleasure,
I cannot deny that (Laughs).
But when you’re really sleeping,
you don’t know what it is,
you are not even there.
So you cannot enjoy sleep
but the result of sleep is something we enjoy.
What sleep does to us in terms of relaxation,
in terms of restfulness,
in terms of regeneration of the system – that we enjoy.
So if your regeneration is really good,
it may so happen the volume of sleep that you need will come down dramatically.
There is one aspect...
I think the other day, somebody was asking me about the pineal gland
If the pineal secretions increase,
these are… This is generally in India it’s called amrutha or the elixir of life.
If amrutha begins to flow,
one thing that’ll happen is sleep will go down
because sleep is death.
If on a certain day, it flows too much, you can’t sleep at all,
this is a normal thing.
So, for whatever reason you’re sleeping or not sleeping or not sleeping enough,
if that’s a issue,
you check in the morning how you are.
If you’re feeling wonderful and you’re active through the day,
forget about sleep.
If you can go without sleep and you are very well, what’s the problem?
Well, that won’t happen right now
but if it happens, what is the issue, I’m asking?
Only if you don’t know how to handle life,
you want to sleep twelve hours a day, isn’t it?
It’s a way of escaping.
If you’re intending to sleep long without purpose,
in a way it’s a suicide.
You need the rest and you sleep, that’s fine,
body needs rest.
So, either garden department or Shoonya meditation,
one of these things will find solution for you (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Aura is the subtle manifestation of everything that you are.
If you look at one’s aura
you clearly know his physical health,
his mental health,
his karmic structure,
in a way his past and present,
if he is stupid even his future.
Yes.
Only if you are stupid we can tell your future,
otherwise we can only tell your past.
Yes. (Laughs)
So aura is a certain manifestation of yourself,
a subtler manifestation in the physical body.
Keeping it clean is good.
Is keeping your body clean good?
Even if you don’t understand somebody sitting next to you understands (Laughter)
that it's good.
It's good to keep your body clean;
it's good to keep your mind clean;
it's good to keep everything that is you clean
because we are not...
I am not trying to teach you sanitation.
What I am saying is
if we want to do something with anything,
first thing is we purify.
If you want to take anything to a higher possibility,
first thing is to purify.
Without purification you cannot do anything better than the way it is right now.
So purifying your body and your mind
for this we have taught you many methods
practices, food, this, that, so many aspects
to keep your body and mind clean.
Aura is a manifestation,
it's not a presence by itself
but if you’re doing sadhana
and if you’re improving your system,
what you manifested yesterday
or what you manifested ten years ago,
may be still hanging around you
and not allowing you to become what you want to be.
So, that can be cleansed.
Have you noticed that when you have a shower,
or bath as we say in India,
which is not a dip but pouring of water over your body…,
when you let water go over you,
you’re not just cleaning the physical self,
that is you are not just cleaning the skin,
something else also gets cleaned.
Let's say you’re feeling very angry, agitated
and all kinds of things happening within you,
you just go have a shower and come out,
you feel (Gestures)
all the nonsense kind of washed off.
So, a shower is not just about cleaning the skin of your body,
you can cleanse the aura to some extent
because what you call as body is a manifestation or a play of five elements.
So you can give yourself a water bath.
You can similarly give yourself a wind bath.
You must see this.
Suppose there is a gentle breeze blowing you just went and stood like this (Gestures),
suppose you wear thin clothes and simply stand like this,
after some time you feel hooooo.
Have you noticed that?
Have you noticed this?
You feel so clean and you want to...
feel like transparent and you want to fly away.
Wind can do that,
it should be just at the right velocity
and feel and temperature and everything if it's right,
you will see wind just cleanses you
wind bath.
We can also give you a mud bath, (Laughs)
you know if you go to the rejuvenation center they’re giving you a mud bath;
similarly we can give you a fire bath. (Laughter)
So what's being done in the temple is a fire bath
because you know she is Bhairavi.
You… you just give yourself a fire bath,
of course you can't pour it over your body,
you just touch the aura of your body in a certain way.
There are certain patterns running in your aura,
along the tracks you run the fire,
you will see suddenly you will feel bright and clear.
You know this,
people from Indian origin you clearly know this in your homes
your grandmothers were taking off drishti for you,
aura cleansing.
Maybe some of your grandmothers knew how exactly do it...
to do it.
Some of them didn’t know, with ignorance they did simply something.
If it's properly done it’ll work wonderfully well;
if it's simply done somehow still works partially.
Any number of times people might have noticed
children are sick,
if they just do little fire bath suddenly they are fine.
Have you noticed this?
Because it's just a fire bath, and it does things to the system.
So what is being given in the temple as Klesha nashana Kriya,
that means a process which destroys impurities is
in English Aura Cleansing,
is to take away the impurities from the aura
so that the body breathes better and feels better
in terms of health, well-being, mental balance, everything.
The neem – they used only the leaf on you?
I think they should have used the stick. (Laughter)
The neem stick is good you know, it awakens lots of people.
In India if you are acting little funny and possessed
they can beat the devil out of you (Laughter) with the neem stick. (Laughs)
Neem is a very cleansing thing.
If you’re eating the morning ball, you know your stomach will be clean.
If you...
if you have any kind of infection stuff in this country
they would always put you on a bed of neem leaf
because it’s a great cleanser of the system
and a great energizer.
So the leaf has tremendous medicinal properties
and very strong pranic reverberations that
and it's bitter enough to get the devil out of you. (Laughs)
Questioner: Sadhguru, I wanted to know that
when we are silent still we feel that mind chattering
which always bothers us
and our thought always shifts back to past and future imaginations
which will not be any of output.
How to get rid of it?
Sadhguru: There are whole lot of thought about this thoughtlessness
Thoughtlessness,
no mind,
these kinds of terms have been propagated all over the place
and these terms have been badly misunderstood
and made into all kinds of things
and people are striving how to stop my mind.
It took millions of years of evolution to get a mind of this kind of capability,
hmm?
Isn’t it?
Millions of years of tremendous amount of nature’s work
that today you have a mind of this kind of scope
and now you want to stop it.
Why is it that you want to stop it?
If your mind was constantly producing absolute pleasantness for you,
would you think how to stop this mind?
Would you?
No.
It's producing lot of unpleasantness,
that’s why you’re thinking of how to stop the mind.
This is the first thing
wherever you go in the world this has gone so much into people’s mind
if you tell them, ‘You meditate,’
they say, ‘But Sadhguru, I am not able to stop my mind.’
I said, ‘That will happen only after you stop your kidneys, liver, heart;
you stop all these things,
then the mind will also stop.
Do you want it to stop?’
‘No.’
‘Then why do you want the mind to stop?
Why do you have such a horrible prejudice against the mind?
You don’t mind if your heart is beating, you can meditate.
You don’t mind if your liver is working you can meditate.
Your kidneys are functioning you can mediate.
If your brain functions you can't mediate?
What is the problem?
You seem to have something against intelligence, isn't it?’ (Laughs)
This is the conspiracy of the stupid against human intelligence
that to meditate means your brain must be frozen.
No.
You don’t have to freeze your brain.
We were looking at this yesterday itself.
We will initiate you into Shambhavi;
it's a simple process.
There are many ways to do it,
this is one simple way but it's a powerful process.
If you sit here,
you will see your body is here,
your mind is somewhere,
who you are is somewhere else.
Once there is space between you and the mind
then what the mind is not doing
what the mind is doing is not even a issue.
It is like you’re stuck in the traffic jam,
you know you’re struggling through the traffic,
that’s one experience.
Suppose you are either standing on Chamundi Hill
or you are floating in a hot air balloon
and look down at all the traffic,
very peacefully, traffic,
hmm!’ (Laughter) (Gestures)
Why?
There’s a distance, isn't it?
When you’re in it
traffic is a different experience.
From really high up there sitting in a hot air balloon
you looked down you can't even hear the sounds,
looks wonderful traffic, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Because there’s a distance.
So once there’s a distance between you and your mind’s activity,
mind is not a problem.
Mind is a miracle, it is not a problem.
And anyway if thoughts are going continuously,
if you’re having a mental diarrhea
obviously you ate some bad food, isn't it?
Yes?
You’re having a physical diarrhea, you ate some bad food, isn't it?
If you’re having a mental diarrhea you obviously consumed something wrong.
What this wrong thing could be is
the moment you identify yourself with something that you are not, then you’re finished;
your mind is a continuous… runs.
There is no other way. Do what you want, try as hard as you want,
it is not going to stop.
If you do not identify yourself with anything that you are not,
you know how to be with everything,
you know how to use everything
but you’re not identified with it,
then you will see if you sit here simply mind will be like this –
if you want to use it you can use it,
otherwise it’ll be like this.
Right now your hands are like this
oh, you’re holding it tied up because it’ll go all over, is it?
No, you can keep it like this. (Gestures)
You can keep it like this; you can keep it like this. (Gestures)
When you want to use it you can use it. So it's a useful instrument.
Suppose your hands become like this (Gestures),
you know some people have become like this?
Yes or no?
If it becomes like this, you will become ridiculous, isn't it?
If it happens to your mind also you’re equally ridiculous.
It is just that you are living in the comfort that nobody else can see it,
but people can see it.
If they watch you closely enough they can see it, isn't it?
And whether they can see it or not, that’s not the point.
The point is the most important faculty of your life is out of control;
it doesn’t matter whether they can see it or not,
that’s not the issue,
the issue is the most important faculty in your life is out of control,
doing its own rubbish all the time,
not doing what you want it to do.
So if you have to be freed from this ailment
you should stop eating bad food.
Wrong food or bad food means you are identifying yourself with things that you are not.
If you sit here, if you are not identified with this and with this,
then you will see everything is just fine.
Then your mind will do what you want it to do,
otherwise it’ll simply hang there and that’s how it should be.
Mind should not be telling its own stories all the time;
it should tell the story that you want it to tell, isn't it?
Otherwise it's quite a nuisance.
(Sadhguru): In the process of evolving life
when I say in the process of evolving life,
I am not talking about how to make monkeys into human beings.
I am talking about how to make human beings into better human beings
better not just physically,
better not just mentally, but as a life a better life.
“Oh, is one life better than the other?”
This is a difficult thing.
But if you closely observe one life to another,
you will see how one life functions
not in terms of social actions,
not in terms of capability and competence,
simply how life functions within the system
is different from person to person.
The system of yoga is seeing
how to make this life function at its highest.
People think highest means,
“Will I be the most successful person on the planet?
Will I run hundred meters in so many seconds?” (Laughs)
Better does not mean that.
Better simply means as a piece of life,
it is better.
There is no context to speak about this dimension in normal parlance
or in English language particularly there is no way to say it
because life is all same.
Yes, life is all same,
but it can function better.
If you allow it, it will function better.
If you do not allow it, it will not function as well.
Whether we like it or we don’t like it, that’s how it is.
When the same
you must see, there is a beautiful example in the Spanda Hall garden.
We planted two Nagalingam trees.
One
we have taken care of them equally well
one has grown and flowered, other is always struggling. (Laughs)
There are different reasons for that,
but it’s like this.
In the same home, two children are born
one just flourishes within himself,
another struggles all the way
because for life to happen it needs a conducive atmosphere.
Creating that conducive atmosphere and allowing life to happen better,
this time of the year has maximum possibility in this direction.
You know about,
definitely you know about the story of Bhishma waiting
to cross this Dakshinayana to Uttarayana before he left his body
because he wants to be out of this pull to the south.
South is called… Down is called south.
So, if it is pulling down,
the Muladhara will be strongest,
the preservative aspect will be strongest.
He does not want to leave at that time.
He wants the sun to move away to a place
where there is an upward pull to his body
there is an upward pull to his being
so that he can ascend in a proper way.
The Margazhi is significant for a spiritual seeker
because it brings a natural sense of stability into the system,
particularly those who are suffering from any kind of ailments,
particularly psychological imbalances
this is a good time to balance
because the sun’s energy and the sun’s gravity is pulling downward,
one can stabilize themselves.
Stability before the upward pull happens is most important.
If you are pulled upward and you are not stable within yourself,
it will lead to imbalances.
So, this is called as sadhana pada
and this is the peak of sadhana
that if you do the necessary sadhana at this time
Generally traditionally,
people don’t want to miss the brahma muhurtam in this month
that is at three-forty. They are all up.
And there are various processes to keep in touch with water.
There are many systems and many cultural practices and yogic practices
to keep in touch with water
because water is the largest element within you
and water is one thing that could slosh.
If your waters are not proper,
it will cause imbalance in the system.
In the yogic system, if there is a psychological imbalance,
it is always seen as water element going out of control
because if you have a tank full of water and shake it, it will slosh.
If you have a tank full of sand or mud, it will not slosh the same way.
So, the water element is what causes various levels of imbalance in a person
if the right kind of things are not done with it.
So, traditionally,
there’re various practices to be in touch with water.
One of the simplest thing is
people always went into temple ponds at three-forty in the morning to take a dip.
It would be good.
We should… we should keep our theerthakund open early, (Few Laugh)
this month from 16th to 13th or 14th of January,
we must keep it open very early.
Those who want to make use of it, can make use of it.
Bringing stability to the waters within,
is one big step towards bringing psychological balance.
Only when there is psychological balance
and physiological balance and energy balance,
will you dare to climb.
Otherwise, a little one step
if everything shakes inside of you,
you will only step backwards.
There’re any number of spiritual seekers
who are constantly one step forward, one step backward,
one step forward, one step backward
because the moment they take a forward step,
they will notice imbalance and they will come back.
This is happening to too many people
because not enough sadhana towards stabilizing themselves.
This particular month offers a phenomenal opportunity
to stabilize oneself because of the way
the relationship between the sun and the earth is such
that it creates maximum stability.
Stability also means inertia.
It’s not mobile.
It is stable.
So, it causes a certain level of inertia and also stability.
So, this month is used for stability and the next month,
the Thai, is used for mobility.
If you have created enough stabi… stability within you,
then only you would dare to be mobile.
Only… If you are riding a bicycle,
only if you are well-balanced, will you dare to move.
Otherwise, you will sit on a bicycle with the stand on. (Laugh) (Few Laugh)
Yes.
Yes, that’s how life is happening for lot of people.
Because of the fear of instability,
they sit on a bicycle with the stand on.
You can pedal, you can get some exercise,
but you are not going anywhere.
So, Margazhi is a blessed month which is used for various processes.
Across the Shiva temples in the south,
there’re various events happening on 16th, 17th, 18th of this month.
The… one important step is the arudra poojas that happen.
Rudra means a roarer
somebody who
who is very effervescent
more than effervescent, a roar.
Arudra means stable
not roaring kind,
just absolutely stable.
Arudra also suggests a certain inertia
because rudra suggests movement and creation.
Arudra suggests no movement and a certain inertia.
There is inertia.
There is enormous inertia in this part of the year,
but the wise should make use of
whatever there is
and we need a certain level of inertia to bring stability.
When you want to bring stability, the thing is to slow down.
If you lose balance, the first thing is to slow down.
So, this is the time when everything slows down
and people want to make use of it and that is why
this Margazhi has become significant in
in a spiritual seeker’s life.
(Sadhguru): This has been the way of the humanity
when they feel helpless they bow down,
when they’re little… feel little powerful
they step on your head.
There is nothing new about it in this world.
So devotion means just that,
to change that
that you do not choose
whether situations or people to
as to how you are,
you are the way you are
that your way of being is not
any more determined by who is standing in front of you.
That’s the idea of devotion.
Everything else,
whatever other values you know,
other ways of behavior you know with people
always is determined by
who is standing in front you right now
and what kind of situation are you in right now.
Devotion means just that –
somebody is there,
nobody is there,
whoever is there,
whatever the situation
you are still the same person.
This is the best way to establish your way of being.
Right now that’s the whole problem.
You are still too much of a flux.
When you are so much of a flux
how to take you anywhere?
You will naturally spill out somewhere, isn't it?
That’s exactly what's been happening with your life,
not just one person,
I am saying with everyone;
you try to go somewhere
then you find half of you is there.
So you have to go back to recollect that
and most probably you won't come back anyway. (Laughter)
So devotion means just that
that your way of being is no more determined
by anything or anybody.
The situations in which you exist
and whom you are facing right now
will not determine the nature of your being,
this is how you are,
because devotion is that
which is devoid of you.
There is no sense of me when are devout.
If you constantly bow down to everything,
genuinely, not as an exercise,
not because somebody has told you,
genuinely if you bow down to everything that you see,
within yourself and outside of yourself
then you will see
there will be no such thing as you left.
When you are devoid of you,
you are always the same.
Once your way of being has become consistent
now we can take you somewhere,
it's possible to move,
it's possible to make a journey,
otherwise the journey will be a deceptive journey,
you will not go anywhere
because you’re too fluid.
So that’s exactly what we are trying to change.
We don’t doubt a bit
that if you are threatened with a gun
you will lick the… that man’s boots.
Do we have any doubt?
No, you definitely will,
but if the same man comes begging in front of your house… (Gestures with contempt)
but if the man pulls out a gun… (Gestures) (Laughter)
This has to change.
This has to change.
That’s what devotion is to change that,
that situations and entities which appear in front of you
will not determine the nature of who you are,
you will always be the same way.
If that firmness,
if that solidity is not brought into your life,
how can you be taken somewhere?
Sadhguru: I don’t think it’s good or bad.
It is just quite stupid to be smoking.
It’s not good or bad,
it’s just stupid
because this machine was not made to smoke.
This is an eco-friendly machine.
But now you are making it into a smoking machine,
that means it’s stupid, isn't it?
A well, very efficient machine
you make it an inefficient machine,
is it not stupid?
Is it good or bad?
There is no such thing.
Questioner: Yeah, we know it’s bad but
Sadhguru: See, that’s the whole thing.
The moment you call it bad
you can't leave it.
Sadhguru: See Vel knows what’s bad.
Why are you giving it titles that it is not?
It’s just stupid, that’s all.
If you see something as stupid
you can't be doing it everyday.
Somewhere
you feel smarter than other people.
Yes?
Questioner: No, because the taste
Sadhguru: See now slowly in the world
people have gotten against you.
Just 10 years ago
if you blow it into somebody’s face
you felt great, they felt stupid.
Now, the equation has reversed in last 10 years time,
isn't it?
Isn't it so?
So, somewhere you thought it’s a smart thing to do.
When you were just 10-year-old kid
you wanted to suck in and blow it out into somebody’s face,
it felt like a smart thing to do.
You tell me,
smoking
a machine that doesn't smoke,
to make it smoke
Right now we are working so hard to make our cars smoke less, isn't it?
Enormous amount of research into fuels and engines
and everything is going on
to make our car smoke less, isn't it?
A non-smoking machine,
if you make it smoke
is it stupid or intelligent?
Questioner: Stupid.
Sadhguru: Say it loudly.
Questioner: Stupid.
Sadhguru: That’s all.
If you see that, slowly it’ll drop off.
Now, there is a certain chemical factor to this.
Your chemistry has become dependent
on nicotine or caffeine or whatever.
That we will change.
You just see
you do Shambhavi Maha Mudra,
suddenly your whole system is so fired up
the need to smoke,
the need to drink coffee, tea, everything just evaporates.
Now, if you do it,
it’s only for the pleasure of it.
One day you feel like drinking coffee you drink it.
One day you feel like smoking you smoke.
That’s up to you,
but the compulsion will be taken away.
The physiological dependence will be taken away.
We will do that with the practice.
But first you see that it’s stupid to do it.
Sadhguru: physicality is always a limitation, isn't it?
You can stretch it,
but there is a limitation for physical body.
Physical means limit, isn't it?
Because the basis of possibility is a limited boundary.
Isn’t it so?
Only because there is a limited boundary,
you can call this physical.
If you take away a defined boundary that a physical form has,
there is no such thing as physicality.
That which is boundless is not physical, isn't it?
‘So, is there a boundary?’
Definitely there is.
Nature has set up substantial limitations upon you,
but what I am talking about is
you are inventing new limitations.
This is not necessary.
As it is nature has set up enough limitations upon you,
you don’t have to invent new limitations
and make yourself much smaller than what you are.
A human being is
there is so much talk about God and heaven and nonsense
mainly because
human beings have not realized
the immensity of what it means to be human.
That is the main problem.
If you are experiencing the immensity of what it means to be human
you wouldn’t be talking so much about other things.
This is a grand thing by itself.
He makes a fish into a human being over the afternoon;
isn't… is it not a grand thing?
But he is doing it unconsciously.
If he can consciously convert a fish into a human being
it is a phenomena, isn't it?
Isn’t it so?
It is an impossible phenomena which all of you are performing,
but unconsciously.
So how much of you has entered into your consciousness;
that’s the question.
If you look at it,
actually not even 1% of who you are
has entered into your consciousness right now.
If a few more percentage points enter,
suddenly everything that you do looks like superhuman.
Now people around me
everyday witness things which they can't believe.
So people keep on saying,
‘Sadhguru, are you superhuman,
are you a human being?’
I keep reminding them,
‘This is not about being superhuman;
this is about realizing being human is super.’
Now, let me tell you a story.
A certain man got spiritual thirst.
In those days when they got a spiritual thirst
they went into the forest.
So he went into the jungle;
found a nice rock for him to sit and meditate.
He sat down;
then he noticed a little away from him
there was a fox;
both its forelegs have severed
crippled fox.
Probably in some trap, hunter’s trap,
both its legs gone.
Nature is not kind to any kind of incapability.
This taking care of incapable people
is essentially a human,
you know, it’s a human society trait.
In nature,
if you are not capable of earning your own food you are done.
So here there is a fox without both its forelegs
but looking healthy and well-fed.
He noticed this and he thought
‘How is this fox managing without legs?’
Then he sat down; he has to do his meditation;
AUM… he started.
Aum, Aum, Aum went on for sometime.
As the evening came
he heard the growl of a lion.
The moment he heard horr… Aum went away
and he ran up a tree and sat down.
He forgot about the meditation.
Then the lion came with a piece of meat in its mouth;
came and dropped it in front of the crippled fox.
And the fox ate this meat and the lion went away.
This man thought,
‘Oh, this is a divine message.
God is trying to say something to me.
A crippled fox being fed by a ferocious lion.
This is a miracle of miracles.
God is sending a message to me.
What's the message,
what's the message?
What’s the message?’
He completely forgot about his meditation
and started thinking
‘What is the message?’
Then he arrived at his own message.
He said,
‘Oh, God is trying to tell me
in this miraculous forest
even a crippled fox is being fed by a ferocious lion.
When this is so,
you fool,
you on the spiritual path,
what are you thinking about food?
Just sit there;
it will anyway come to you.’
So he sat down, Aum
one day;
second day Aauumm
Third day
Sixth, - seventh day he is groaning for life.
Not able to move,
totally weakened,
he was groaning -
death-throes.
A yogi was passing this way;
he heard these noises;
he came up to him and asked,
‘What happened to you, why are you like this?’
He said, ‘Oh great yogi,
please tell me I got a divine message.
I went by it and I became like this.’
Yogi asked, ‘What happened?’
He said, ‘Here, look at the that fox,
look at him, he is well fed.
Everyday this lion comes with a piece of meat
and it feeds him.
Don’t you think this is a divine message?
Please tell me is this a divine message?’
The yogi said,
‘For sure this is a divine message,
but why did you choose to imitate a crippled fox rather than a generous lion?’
So this is the choice you have;
if you are imitating a crippled lion… a crippled fox,
a generous lion looks like a miracle.
It's not a miracle.
It is doable.
Yes,
it is doable;
nothing miraculous about it
but… there are two ways to look at it.
One way is,
everything is a miracle.
Tell me, you put filth into the ground
and mangoes come out of the tree,
sweetness.
The filth and the sweetness of the mangoes,
are they same?
They are same. Isn't it so?
Aren’t they same?
The food that you eat
and what you do in your toilet the next day
they are same.
Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
If you put that same filth into the field tomorrow
once again it becomes your food.
Isn't it so?
It is the same
but can you treat both of them the same way?
No, you need discretion as to how to treat it
but they are same, isn't it?
Making filth into mangoes, is this not a miracle?
Making fish into a human being, is this not a miracle?
Yes or no?
Everything is a miracle
that’s one way of looking at life.
Another way of looking at life is
nothing is a miracle;
everything is happening between cause and effect.
If you are shortsighted enough
not to be able to see the cause,
you are only seeing the effect,
then it is like this.
If you are able to see both the cause and the effect
everything is explainable,
everything is repeatable,
everything is possible to make it happen.
Now I am talking about a technology
to make you into a miracle,
but this is not a miracle.
All technologies look like miracles, isn't it?
Suppose you know nothing about electricity
and the hall is dark right now
and I tell you,
‘you You just watch it now,
I will just touch this part of the wall
and the hall will be flooded with light,’
and if I do it,
‘Wow!’ -
You will bow down to me;
Yes or no?
Anything that you do not understand is a miracle for you, isn't it?
Yes?
Anything that you are unable to grasp is a miracle for you.
Now I am going to pull out something from my pocket,
just a combination of plastic and metal,
I am going to do this and talk to somebody in India
or America of where you want,
is this a miracle or not?
The problem is all of you have it,
this is the problem.
Only if I had it,
you know, if I had a cell phone 1000 thousand years ago
I would have become God Himself.
The damn thing came to me too late.
If I had a light bulb a thousand years ago
I could have become a god;
the damn thing came too late.
Technologies never come in time, you know.
Anything that you do not understand is a miracle for you
and at the same time
is there any one thing that you truly understand?
I want you to look at this.
Do you understand this flower, fully?
Do you?
You may have studied botany for 10,000 years
but do you understand this flower fully?
Do you understand a single atom in this existence?
Do you?
No.
So everything is a miracle.
If you look deep enough everything is miraculous.
On one level everything is explainable;
on another level, everything is miraculous.
That’s the beauty of life.
If you have the necessary reason
and the necessary sense of wonder and enquiry in you,
you can know it all
and still wonder about it because
you can study this flower for the rest of your life
and still wonder about it.
That’s the beauty of existence, isn't it?
Or you can be a fool who’ll will draw conclusions about this flower
and believe you know it.
That’s the difference.
Everything about your life is like this. Isn’t it so?
Yes?
Everything about your life is like this.
So it's miraculous and mundane at the same time.
It is within reason and beyond reason at the same time.
It is human and divine at the same time.
You can play between the two;
it's very beautiful.
You can also become an animal, you know.
Very easily human beings can behave like animals, isn't it?
‘-Cause what is human is not established.
You can freely, seamlessly move from animal nature to human nature to divine nature
and back again if you wish.
It's very beautiful;
don’t mess it up.
Sadhguru: So
this breath or what conducts the breath,
in yoga we call this the koorma nadi.
You know what’s a koorma?
Not kuruma
Koor
No I saw some tongues
Koorma means a turtle or a tortoise,
an amphibious creature,
it’s in the water but it can also venture out.
So you are a
you can become an amphibious creature
if you master this koorma nadi,
that means you are in the body
but you can be little outside the physical nature
because this is your desire.
Your desire is not to leave the physical for good,
you want to be rooted in the physical
but you want to have a taste of what is beyond,
this is human desire always.
In trying to
See everything that you are doing,
please look at this,
whether you are going out to conquer the world,
you get married,
you bear children,
you do this,
you drink,
you go to temple,
you drug,
you do whatever the hell you want
essentially all that you’re looking for is
you want a bigger experience of life, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
The only way your life’s experience can be enhanced is
by expanding your perception.
If your eyes can see something that it cannot see right now,
your experience is enhanced.
If your ears can hear something
that you cannot hear something right now,
your experience is enhanced.
Like this if your perception is enhanced
only then your experience is enhanced,
otherwise you are only going on imagining things
within the limited data that you have already gathered,
yes?
The only way to enhance is to expand
or to come out.
So koorma nadi,
this is
this breath is referred to as koorma nadi
because if you use it properly
you can become like an amphibious creature
that you can be in the body
but you can venture outside.
This is like a rope -
let’s say we pull out your breath right now,
if I take away your breath what will happen?
You and your body will fall apart.
Right now in your experience
you are the body sitting here
but this rice and … chintha thokku and gomukoora
everything is gathered up here and sitting here.
Yes or no?
Yes?
It’s the food that you’ve eaten.
Is this an accumulation?
Do you understand this is an accumulation?
What you accumulate can be yours,
can never ever be you, isn’t it?
Yes?
I can say this is mine, this is mine, this is mine
but if I say this is me, this is me, this is me-
lost it, isn’t it?
Whatever you accumulate can be yours,
can never ever be you.
So the moment… if I pull the breath away
then you and what is… what you have gathered will fall apart,
you and your body will fall apart.
Or in other words it’s the breath
or the koorma nadi which ties you and your body together.
When we say koorma nadi,
we are not just talking about the passage of air.
Right now you are incapable of experiencing the breath,
in the sense,
see right now if you watch
you think you are watching the breath –
no.
You are only noticing the sensations caused by the passage of breath,
you are not capable of knowing the breath itself.
So the breath
or what sets up this pattern,
what directs this pattern that we are calling as koorma nadi.
If you have some mastery over that
you become an amphibious creature
that is you are rooted in the physical
but you can venture out.
If this much freedom arises in human life
suddenly you know there is another possibility
that there is something beyond physical nature.
Whatever you are going through this
within this physical cocoon is not everything,
you know an…a completely different dimension of life.
If this one thing you know,
if you have a moment of experience beyond your physicality,
death is not a issue, isn’t it?
Hmm?
If you know life beyond your physical body right now,
death is not a issue.
Death is a big issue because you know nothing beyond the body,
when they threaten to take it away there is terror in people
simply because everything that you know is going away.
If you knew something beyond the body,
suddenly this would not be such a big problem.
And it… it is not a problem,
it is a solution for all our problems that we are mortal.
If you were here
Let’s say next million years you are not going to go - tch
that is a problem, isn’t it?
We must live our span and we must go,
that’s a good thing
Sadhguru: Today when I was
sitting in the Samyama hall in the morning,
there were some things that we had to attend to and
I was just about to write a note to someone saying,
‘Tomorrow what to do,’
and I wrote one word ‘tomorrow’
and this word ‘tomorrow’ hit me so hard
so I wrote a small poem instead of a note,
not to that person but to you.
So this poem is called,
‘Tomorrow’.
A day that never came
but has managed to spoil every game
A day that never came but has managed to spoil every game
One day that takes all the blame,
the basis of all fear and shame
Cripples the blossoming of the life’s flame
A spoiler that makes life a dream
Traps the limitless in a limited scene
One day that takes all the blame, the basis of all fear and shame
Cripples the blossoming of life’s flame
A spoiler that makes life a dream
Traps the limitless in a limited scene
A day that never comes but the world it rules
A day that never comes but the world it rules.
Tomorrow never happened to anybody
but the idea of tomorrow
has robbed people,
a huge mass of people of their life,
just the idea.
Nobody ever touched a tomorrow in their life,
nobody ever experienced one,
nobody ever saw one.
Just the idea completely robs people of everything that could be life.
What shall we do for tomorrow’s darshan?
Oh, tomorrow when I come to darshan I’ll bring an umbrella.
Darshan means to behold.
You can only behold now,
you can never behold tomorrow.
Not because it’s out of reach,
because it doesn't exist.
You can only imagine tomorrow,
you will never behold tomorrow,
never ever.
But still
for most human beings
it is this,
a idea
an idea whose time will never come,
it is that idea which drives most people’s lives, unfortunately.
Even if you drive your life with an idea
even if you drive your life with an idea,
you must drive with an idea whose time may come sometime,
but this is an idea whose time will never come
but it still drives people,
it still drives most lives on the planet.
That is why most lives on this planet are not lives,
they’re just bunch of thoughts, emotions, ideas, prejudices.
Most lives are not a reality,
they’re just a psychological
they’re just a psychological existence,
they’re just a dream,
because reality happens now,
reality happens here.
In your mind only a dream can happen.
And
life and death will happen today,
dream is about tomorrow.
It’s better to dream of something that’ll come true.
Tomorrow is a dream that will never come true.
So
what you refer to as spiritual process
it’s about knowing life.
You can know life only today;
you can know life only now.
This is the moment.
I’m not trying to give you a teaching.
When I say this is the moment,
‘Oh, Sadhguru said this is the moment.’
It’s not about that.
This moment is not an idea,
it is the only reality.
This moment is not a teaching,
it is the only living thing.
It is
The only living thing in the existence is right now,
nothing else.
So don’t try to understand it,
don’t try to digest it,
you just have to behold it in all its entirety.
Start with the rain;
good way to begin.
Pravin Gordhan:Today’s world is about possession.
It’s about buying the next biggest car,
the next biggest house,
I won’t name any brands (Sadhguru laughs)
but the next handbag, or shoes, or whatever it is.
What... What’s the... How do you reconcile that ethic of just acquisition at any cost,
sometimes at great debt, and if you like,
the kind of value system that yoga would teach one
or ask one to embrace?
Sadhguru: See, the yoga does not teach any value system.
That’s the beauty of it.
The yoga only strives to give you methods
to create an experience of inclusiveness.
From your inclusiveness,
from the experience of inclusiveness...
See, suppose you experience the person next to you as a part of yourself,
I don’t have to tell you, “Be nice to them,
don’t kill them,
don’t harm them.”
All these things – not necessary.
Now, about wanting more –
wanting to be more is natural in a human being.
Whoever you are,
whatever you are,
you want to be something more than what you are right now.
If you know only money, you’re thinking more money.
If you know only handbags, more handbags (Laughter)
because you can’t make it bigger
because you’ve got to carry it (Laughter).
Pravin Gordhan: That’s true.
Sadhguru: More handbags.
And if you know wealth, more wealth,
if you know knowledge, more knowledge,
if you know love, more love –
whatever is your currency,
but every human being is striving to be something more than what they are right now.
If that more happens to you right now,
what next?
Hello?
Pravin Gordhan: More.
Sadhguru: More.
If that more happens, what? More, more, more, all right.
If you look at this carefully,
this process of wanting to expand consciously,
if you look at it,
how much more would settle you for good, if you see this,
you clearly know that you’re looking for an infinite expansion.
If I make you the king or queen of this planet,
would you be fulfilled, I’m asking?
Don’t look at me hopefully, I’m... I will not (Laughter).
I’m not known to commit such blunders (Laughter).
Pravin Gordhan: But you see, the principle of acquiring more is causing trouble in the world because
the world is becoming increasingly –
like South Africa and many other countries, including India –
more unequal.
So, I picked up some interesting numbers.
This is when Finance Ministers do look at numbers (Laughter).
That global private wealth in 2015 rose to one-hundred-and-sixty-eight-trillion dollars,
if you can imagine that.
And that’s a 5.2 percent increase.
And the greatest increase comes from Asia Pacific.
China has now over two-million millionaires amongst them.
India is growing fast in that direction as well.
The Asia Pacific region grew in wealth at thirteen percent
to thirty-seven-trillion dollars of wealth amongst the top brackets.
And trade unionists, for example, from...
from Britain says the following –
“For all the moral angst being expressed by business leaders and politicians
about growing wealth inequality,
very little is being done to change the status quo.
Unless companies here and across the globe rein in executive salaries,
pay... pay their fair share of taxes –
I’m sure by now all of you have heard about Panama,
a country that you didn’t think existed –
and invest in decent jobs,
the yawning gap between the haves and the have-nots will continue to grow.”
That’s the dilemma, which is causing all sorts of difficulties,
both within countries and within the globe as... as a whole.
What’s an alternate way of looking at the question of wealth and greater equity in... in the globe?
Sadhguru: See, we are...
Pravin Gordhan: Because the search for this wealth is
what creates all sorts of conflicts amongst human beings
and contradicts the kind of ethic that I think that you are promoting.
Sadhguru: No, I am not promoting any ethic.
This’s what I want to say.
Human beings want more. If that more happens, they want more and more and more.
So, if you really look at it,
what they are looking for is not more, they are looking for all.
They want all.
That’s why I said, if you become the king of this planet, will it settle?
No, you will look at the stars.
This is the nature of the human being.
You cannot contain this (Referring to oneself).
You can give as many ethics as you want,
you can give as many pacifist philosophies as you want,
you cannot contain the desire of even one human being
because the longing to expand is inevitable within the human being.
Now if you want to expand in a limitless way,
trying to do it physically is a foolish thing.
Your desire is fantastic.
Infinite expansion is a fantastic desire.
The method is hopeless.
This will not happen by having more cars or more bags,
whatever is your thing.
This can only happen if you transcend the limitations of physicality.
This is where yoga comes in.
Yoga means you learn to erase the boundaries of your physicality.
Erasing the boundaries of physicality means –
right now, as we sit here, this is me, that is you,
one-hundred percent clear,
no any kind of ambiguity about that.
But as you sit here, to be alive, you have to breathe.
Breathe means what you exhale (Laughs), the trees inhale,
what they exhale, you inhale.
One half of your lungs are actually hanging out on the tree.
So… Or in other words,
what you think is you is not some kind of a solid state.
Every day, something comes in, something goes out,
transaction is happening –
not just on the level of food and breath,
every subatomic particle is in transaction with everything else in the universe.
Yoga means that this reality of your existence,
you begin to experience.
It is not a philosophy,
this is modern physics, which is telling you that
you don’t exist as an individual,
it is happening as one big happening.
But the magnanimity of the creation is such,
though you are just a microscopic existence,
though you are part of everything,
you’re just a bubble in the larger space,
still it gives you a powerful sense of individuality,
so that you can experience your life as an individual.
But the reality of the existence is,
this is one living cosmos and you blew your soap bubble.
When you were children,
you blew soap bubbles,
your bubble and somebody else’s bubble was distinctly different.
The moment it burst, my air and your air, there’s no such thing.
Similarly, this (Referring to oneself), we’ve blown these bubbles.
And without the rest of it being there, we cannot be here.
So knowing this experientially is yoga,
that you understand –
not intellectually but experientially you know –
that your existence is not individualistic, but it’s universal.
So, this economic disparity is happening because
people are trying to fulfill this aspiration of wanting to be something more,
something more,
something more.
Because they don’t know anything else, they’re going through money right now.
Because the disparity and the rise of
wealth in certain countries, whatever, is...
See, one thing we must understand.
In the last hundred years,
no new imports have happened to this planet from outside.
Do you agree with me?
Little exports have happened,
some space crafts and others have gone.
But no imports have happened,
no major asteroids have come in to add to us.
So, we are the same amount.
There’s a very beautiful incident which happened in 2008.
When the recession was just hitting,
which we were discussing just before this,
an American delegation went to China.
I happened to be at the Economic Forum at that time
and you...
I saw the entire American delegation was carrying,
you know, a mile-long faces,
all in a state of depression because they had a few billions less than before.
What they had four months ago, a few billions less,
so they were all miserable.
So they asked me to handle a...
a session called “Recession and Depression” (Laughter)
at the World Economic Forum. So I said (Laughs),
“Recession is bad enough.
Now you have depression” (Laughter)!
Pravin Gordhan: Economic one or the personal one?
Sadhguru: “But the way we have structured our economic engine,
the way we have structured the economy of this planet right now is such,
if you fail, you will be depressed,
if you succeed, we will be damned for good.”
Yes.
So I said, “It’s better you’re depressed.
At least you can sit down and think,
‘What are we doing wrong?’”
Because no more has happened on the planet,
we’ve just turned one thing into another,
another thing into another.
Nothing more we have added to the planet, right?
So a delegation went to China,
American delegation, and they were all in a state of depression.
So a Chinese wise man gave them a lesson (Laughs).
He took a chair and placed it in front of a mirror.
And he said,
“See, there are two chairs now –
one here, one in the mirror.”
He went and stood between the chair and the mirror and said,
“Now there’s only one chair.
And now you’re depressed” (Laughter).
There always was only one chair,
there always will be only one chair.
But in the marketplace,
you can place two mirrors and create 10000 chairs or a million chairs if you want.
But there has always been only one chair,
let’s learn to sit on it properly (Laughter).
Let’s make sure (Laughs) everybody can sit on it somehow (Applause).
So, this wealth creation, generation, disparity,
all said and done...
I’m not saying it needs to be fixed.
Yes, it needs to be addressed definitely.
But one thing is clear, all of us
all of us,
compared to how our parents were living,
materially we’re living better than them. Yes or no? Please, you must admit.
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Compared to our grandfathers,
we’re living way better than them. Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Compared to our great-grandfathers,
we’re living way, way better than them.
Or in other words,
we are the first generation enjoying these levels of comforts and convenience.
Let’s not whine.
Let’s strive to do what we want,
but we can do it joyfully.
We don’t have to become miserable,
simply because somebody else has more.
This more business will go up and down.
Who has more, who has less keeps happening.
But the important thing is,
we look at somebody else and we become miserable.
Yes,
this disparity must be addressed.
The ownership of the property unfortunately is going into a few hands in the world,
which has to be fixed.
But how will you fix it?
If you try to fix it, you will move towards communism.
Pravin Gordhan: I don’t know why he’s pointing in my direction (Laughter).
Sadhguru: No, no, no.
Pravin Gordhan: I used to belong to the South Africa Communist Party, I must confess (Laughter).
Sadhguru: And now I can firmly point (Laughter).
Pravin Gordhan: Now you can firmly point (Laughter).
Sadhguru: So, communism is a fantastic idea.
There’s no better idea, in terms of economics,
that everybody by his need, not by his greed – so fantastic!
when Marx came up with this idea,
many people around the world,
all right-thinking people got very excited about this around the world.
Marx predicted, United States of America will become the first communist country in the world.
How wrong he was!
The word communist is the worst thing
that you can say to a person in United States today (Laughs).
Pravin Gordhan: Particularly in the 1950s.
Sadhguru: Even now (Both laugh). Even now,
if you want to really accuse somebody of the most horrendous thing,
you don’t call him a murderer,
you don’t call him a racist,
you say he’s a communist (Laughter).
That’s the worst thing.
Pravin Gordhan: No, no, that happened in South Africa too.
Sadhguru: No, now I’m not pointing at you (Laughter).
Pravin Gordhan: No, no, no, now I’m pointing down here, you see.
I’m saying (Laughs) that’s what we were called in South Africa
Sadhguru: Yes.
Pravin Gordhan: …whether you were there or not, you see.
Sadhguru: So, this happened.
Mark Twain was so excited about this communism,
so he went to Russia.
So he was walking in a country road and he saw a country gentleman,
with two hens under his arms, walking.
So he caught up with him and said,
“Comrade, is it true...
Are you a communist?” he asked.
He said, “Yes, I’m a party member.”
“See, is it true that if you had two bungalows,
you would give away one to somebody who doesn’t have?”
He said, “Of course, I’m a party member, I would do that.”
He asked, “If you had two carriages, would you give away one to somebody?”
He said, “Of course, I hold office in the party in my village,
I would definitely do that.”
“If you had two chicken, would you give away one to somebody?”
He said, “What the hell? This is all I have” (Laughter)!
So, what was a fantastic idea became a ridiculous thing in practice
because people who had nothing wanted to share (Laughter).
When people who have something want to share, it’ll become a beautiful thing.
“I have a lot and I want to share”,
this would become a beautiful thing in the world.
But people who had nothing, the poorest of the poor societies,
they took to communism because they had got nothing to share
But if the richest became communist,
what a wonderful world we would have created.
This was the vision of Marx.
But unfortunately, he might have known lot about economics,
but he misjudged human beings (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: In Arundhati’s book, I read that
you were thirteen when you first quite accidentally discovered yoga.
You were children playing in… at the bottom of a well,
that’s what the book says (Sadhguru laughs).
Tell us, how did you discover yoga?
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs). I told that because that’s how it happened to me,
I said that to her, I don’t know how she’s written, I’ve not read it (Barkha Dutt laughs).
I said that to her because I want people to understand
the nature of the universe is, even if you do
for the wrong reasons, you do the right thing, still it works.
If you do the wrong thing even for the right reasons, it still doesn’t work.
People need to understand this
because the whole world has invested on goodness.
The goddamn goodness is killing the world.
There’re too many good people
and these good people are the biggest problem.
It’s always a good Indian who wants to fight a good Pakistani,
good Hindu wants to fight a good Muslim,
good American wants to fight with just about anybody (Laughter).
The more good you are,
the more fighting you are.
The more good you think you are,
because goodness is always in comparison
Barkha Dutt: Don’t forget the good journalists
who promote these fighting everyday on channels (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Because your goodness comes by comparing yourself to somebody.
If you were alone on this planet, you wouldn’t know
whether you’re good or bad.
What we need on this planet is sensible human beings.
Little more sense we could do with, isn’t it, for sure,
in every aspect of life?
Engineering essentially means
you could have built this structure whichever way you want
but you’ll have to keep looking up, when it’s going to crash on your head.
Engineering means you put it up in a sensible manner,
the way it stays,
without anxiety about it.
Similarly, Inner Engineering means you engineer yourself in such a way,
you can go through the process of life
without being anxious about your suffering
“What will happen to me?”
There is no such thing because you engineered yourself well.
Whatever the hell happens around you,
within yourself you are the same thing.
So every time I launch one mega-project,
you’ll say, “Sadhguru, if it doesn’t work?”
If it doesn’t work, what (Laughs)?
If it doesn’t work, what?
If everything that I’m doing, if nothing works,
I will still die blissfully.
This is guaranteed.
I want to make sure it’s guaranteed for every human being
so that they can live their life without the fear of suffering.
Right now, instead of seeing how suffering should go,
people are busy romanticizing suffering.
The moment you romanticize suffering,
it’s very clear you are not interested in human well-being,
you like drama.
Barkha Dutt: Hmm. You often spoke about how economic leaders are going to be the future of the world,
you’ve been interacting with CEOs.
It’s rare to find a spiritual guru
who’s also quite openly capitalistic.
Are you a capitalist?
Sadhguru: What is that?
Barkha Dutt: Who believes that wealth creation is
for the greater good (Sadhguru laughs) of people and society.
Sadhguru: See, a whole lot of people are attached to poverty right now
because without poor people,
without hungry people they cannot survive.
I am not one of those.
I want to see that
six hundred million people on… in this country are postponing their dinner tonight.
But we are postponing major decisions in the Parliament every day, all right?
I am not a part of that,
I want things to happen
because I know what it means to postpone a dinner.
I don’t want that to happen to people.
Children are postponing their dinner tonight,
probably a hundred million children in this country have postponed their dinner to tomorrow
and that’s not a joke.
So, these jokers who identify themselves with this or that
are going on playing their joke on the people,
every day.
So capitalism is an ancient word,
it no more exists.
We are talking about a market economy.
When only a few families had access to capital, it was capitalism.
It is no more capitalism.
Any… If you have a good idea
and you know how to execute it,
there is capital for everyone, all right?
So, we have tried communism,
it’s a wonderful idea
but that must happen willingly.
If you enforce it, it’s the ugliest thing.
We have seen it
We have seen a major demo on the planet,
when a… most ugly things happened,
you tried to enforce it.
Karl Marx might have known lot about economy.
You know, I was… I
When I was fifteen, I was all gung ho
about Engels (Referring to German social scientist Friedrich Engels) and Karl Marx and stuff.
But he did not understand human nature,
I realized that when I was sixteen.
Thirteen, fourteen, I was all fired up reading up all the communist literature from Russia (Laughs)
but by the time I was sixteen,
I realized these people don’t understand what is human aspiration.
Without understanding what’s human aspiration,
you try to build a society,
you try to build a nation,
it’s a disaster, okay?
Cruel disaster.
But maybe it will work when really
a country or a society is in total dumps.
You have to force it out.
When you have to force it out, it works
but after that it won’t work.
In a way, if you come to the ashram -
nearly four thousand people are living in the ashram –
well, you can say it’s communist but by willingness, it’s not by,
“Okay, I did so much, so I get so much” – no.
Everybody gets what they need.
So this is not enforced, this is by choice.
If by choice you’re willing to share, how fantastic it is;
but “I have nothing, you have something, I want you to share” -
how ugly it is!
In the last three-and-half, four years I
I saw a few people whom I knew for a long time dying –
one of my aunts and a few others.
They were very dear to me when I was young.
They were good people
and their lives worked out
according to their dreams.
They wanted certain kind of education – that happened.
They wanted certain kind of businesses and careers –
that happened.
They want certain kind of children – that happened.
They want their daughter to get married in a certain way – that happened.
They want their son to go to America – that happened.
They wanted grandchildren – that happened
and grandchildren turned out cute; that happened.
Everything that they wanted
according to their dreams, not somebody else’s,
according to their dreams life worked out
without much aberration;
here and there small things ;
But when the last few years
of their life came,
when death is coming,
they're completely out of sorts and broken people –
nothing wrong,
just life is coming to a natural conclusion.
Everything that they wanted happened and
now time to go,
they're completely lost human beings
simply because there is no spiritual element in their life.
All they known in their life is their physical body,
their psychological makeup, their emotions and
suddenly all of those things that they have
don’t mean anything
and they're completely out of sorts,
pathetic confusion,
pathetic level of confusion and disturbance within them simply
because there is no another dimension to stand upon.
I decided we must give some
simple spiritual processes
which does not need
so much commitment and intellect and practice and everything.
If you do the kind of spiritual process we are giving you,
you can live blissfully and also die blissfully.
Now I'm looking at this,
even if they don’t live blissfully
at least they must die peacefully.
There is no human being on the planet
who does not deserve this.
Every human being deserves this,
it doesn’t matter who he is, what he or she is,
it's important at least that they die well even
if they did not live well.
Above all, my request for everyone is
it doesn’t matter what you do with your life,
somehow you must acquire at least one little spiritual process in your life;
otherwise people who lived well die badly, you know,
because they don’t have a spiritual process,
when the physical fails suddenly
they have nothing to hang onto,
and physical will fail.
It's not a
I'm not making a prediction,
it's a guarantee. Yes?
One day physical will fail, isn't it?
So it is not a prediction that you can contemplate upon,
it is a guaranteed result of life.
So it's very, very important
something beyond the physical is
a living force in everybody’s life.
If that is not so,
one will be out of sorts towards the end.
Namaskar
the physical world is a product of
polarities masculine and feminine yin
and yang leader Pingala Shiva Shakti
right-brained or left-brained or
whatever you may want to call them
the longing to find union of polarities
is finding expression through ambition
conquest love sex and yoga
Yoga means Union simplest form of yoga
is to put your hands together in
Namaskar Namaskar brings harmony between
two polarities within put your hands
together in namaskar and look upon
someone or something with loving
attention in three to five minutes you
will begin to harmonize Namaskar
yourself into peace Namaskar yourself
into love Namaskar yourself into union
know the union of yoga on this
international yoga day let us put our
hands together and unite the world may
you unfold your being with folded hands
aaaa
aaaa

Sadhguru: See, all of us have to live in this universe.
No choice about it right now.
But university is a choice
and that’s why you’re asking this question.
How much time?
Education is of value to do certain things,
but what should we be doing
as individual human beings,
as a generation of people,
what should we be doing in our lives
What I would say is as a young man
I want you to open your eyes and look at the world.
Right now, please see
what is the most needed thing in the world right now.
You don’t do some fanciful thing that you like to do.
You must do what’s most needed, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
If you get carried away by situations
people become like this
it’s useful, but it is not the basic thing.
Today, you saw a train burning.
So, you want to become a firefighter.
Tomorrow you saw something, you want to become that.
In reaction… in emotional reaction, you choose to become something.
It could be useful on some level.
But now when most young people cannot think,
you are thinking,
“What should I do with my life?”
When such a thought has come,
I would say spend little more time on it,
not being influenced by anybody or anything.
Simply look at it
what is it that the humanity needs most?
What is it that the world needs most today?
I want you to recognize that.
The only thing that needs to be fixed on this planet is human beings.
Everything else is fine.
Isn’t it so?
So, I would say all young people, not just you,
must take a break from what you’re doing.
Just caught up -
because you did… you did school you went to the college,
because you did college you went to the next thing
and the next thing and you end up with a Ph.D.
what to do?
It’s dangerous, you know?
Because, the education scientists are saying,
if you go through twenty years of formal education and land up with a Ph.D. or something,
seventy percent of your intelligence is irrevocably destroyed.
Yes.
You will become a very knowledgeable idiot.
And today, knowledge has no use because
whatever a Ph.D. holder knows,
a high-school kid can open the internet and talk the same language.
You can’t even look smart anymore with what you collected, isn’t it?
Because… just about anybody will talk these things because it’s all over the place.
So, are you preparing for a university or the universe?
That’s where you have to live,
unless you want to become an academic.
I am not saying these things are wrong,
but human beings
sensible human beings must invest their life towards what is needed most, isn’t it?
Not some fanciful thing that I want to do or you want to do.
You can do whatever,
joyfully or miserably, isn’t it?
And just because today you think, “By doing this, I will be happy,”
if you go, don’t ever think you will stay happy by doing that after some time.
Everybody when they got their first job,
what a beautiful day it was!
You went to this
mangy little office,
sat there and wow!
Tch, how it felt!
But after a few years, sitting behind the same table, it’s taking your life
the same job,
the same marriage,
the same situations – they’re taking your life.
At one day, it looked like heaven.
After some time, it looks like hell, isn’t it?
Not because there’s something wrong with those jobs,
simply because you’re doing it for the wrong reason,
you’re just doing it for the wrong reasons, that’s all.
Now that you are thinking,
I would say take a few weeks off.
We’re willing to give you the space.
Just stay, uninfluenced by anybody, just look at it.
There are many things you will want to do right now
because of immediate compulsions.
You are broke right now.
You think the first thing is to find a job
or some other compulsion within you,
you think the first thing is to do this.
Beside your compulsions
Suppose, you had none of these compulsions,
what would you like to do with life,
that’s what you should do.
You should not decide your life
and the course of your life based on immediate compulsions.
You decide in your life,
if you do this for hundred years and look back,
after hundred years if you look back, is it still worthwhile?
You do that.
There are many others who would like to be you.
Tch, “Oh, I wish I was twenty and I wish I could think what to do at that time, I did something.”
There’re any number of people here.
Now that you are twenty and you are fortunate that you’re thinking
and it’s fortunate that you are here,
it’s time you think straight before you do anything.
(Sahguru): One more cool question,
cool it must be, not a hot question,
not a burning question.
Cool question?
Warm question, hmm? (Laughter)
You have a cool question?
Hmm?
Questioner: What is cool life?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Questioner: What is cool life?
Sadhguru: What is?
Questioner: Cool life.
Sadhguru: Cool… cool life?
When you get wet in the rain it's cool. (Laughter)
You take a dip in the Theerthakund, it's pretty cool.
What's cool life?
There is no cool life.
Either you're cool or not, that’s all.
Whatever the situation.
Madurai was flooding that day,
some people got hot;
I was cool. (Laughter)
So my experience of the sathsang is it was a cool thing,
for somebody else it's hot;
that’s their problem. (Laughs)
So life is neither cool nor hot,
it is you who can make it either cool or hot.
If you get this, everything is cool.
But anyway, this is only a change of terminology.
In 70s, 80s if something was good we said, ‘It's hot, man.’ (Laughter)
Now they're saying, ‘It's cool, man.’ (Laughter)
So it's just change of terminology for the same thing, okay?
Something is good,
so people… maybe this,
‘It's hot,’ came from North Pole.
With the global warming,
the terminology is changing,
cool is in,
hot is out.
But at that time, hot was the good thing,
‘It's a hot thing.’
Yes?
You know the language, in 70s and 80s,
everybody said it's a hot thing.
If somebody’s really good you said, ‘Oh, he or she is hot.’
(Child among participants laughs)
Now they say… (Laughter)
You must see this one, come here. (Laughter)
Come… come here, come here.
You must see how she's laughing at every joke.
(Brings child to his lap)
Huh, look at her! (Laughter)
She's cool. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: what you consider as divine,
what you consider as God is essentially
that which is the source of creation, isn't it?
If you pay little attention to the creation,
whether to a flower or a leaf or an ant,
if you just pay enough attention to the ant
I am sure you have not, because they have no orthopedic issues
but if you pay enough attention to a simple ant,
it is such a phenomenal mechanism.
You can't find another machine like that.
The efficiency with which it moves with those eight legs is an incredible thing.
So if you look at any piece of creation,
one thing that it smacks of is intelligence of the highest kind, isn't it?
Why is it nobody said, ‘God is intelligence’?
People are saying ‘God is love,
God is this, God is that’
all these things we are capable of.
An intelligence beyond ourselves is what our problem is, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Even a dog is very loving.
Not just God;
we don't know about God, but dogs are very loving, aren’t they?
Yes or no?
We are giving all the wrong qualities.
If you pay attention to the creation, you will see,
whatever is the source of creation – it’s intelligence is unbeatable, isn't it?
Why is it that nobody ever said,
‘God is intelligence?’
Unfortunate, isn't it?
Sadhguru: This is
This is something that people have been struggling with for ages,
because these are two different types
these are two different dimensions of one’s existence.
About
These two dimensions are about doing something,
making something happen
and allowing something to happen to you.
These are two different aspects.
So now the question is,
‘Which is more,
which is less?
Can I do it all or
there is nothing I can do,
I have to just allow it?’
If you’re capable of just allowing it
that would be very good for you,
but if you are the kind who just allows things to happen to you,
do not expect people around you to understand
anything about you because they will not understand.
People around you cannot understand what it means to allow.
Doing is something that they understand,
but doing is a limited possibility
and doing is a very laborious process.
It's like, if I want to bake bread,
how much of it do you do,
how much of it do you allow?
There is an equal proportion of both.
If you do not knead it hard enough,
if you do not work to load the oven properly,
if you do not set the right temperatures,
which is all your doing, it's not going to happen.
But if you’re not willing to allow,
that you’re willing to close it and simply sit there like a pregnant woman,
yes,
if you do not know how to bake bread,
it is as complicated as bearing a child.
Yes?
You have to sit there and wait.
If you are too much of a doer,
you want to open every few moments and look at it,
you will not have bread,
you will have something else.
This goes for baking breads,
growing a plant,
bringing up a child or
bringing yourself up,
which is you’re realizing is the hardest task (Laughs),
that if you want to bring yourself up,
there’s a certain amount of striving and doing on your part to be done.
Without allowing, it will be an extraordinarily difficult process
and incomplete process for a very long time to come,
so both are needed.
If both have entered your life at the same time,
you must consider yourself to be an extremely fortunate human being,
whether you understand the fortune or not,
because there are people,
who for lifetimes are just doing
without grace being available to them.
There are people who are just waiting for grace to happen,
not doing anything,
because they do not know what to do,
doing their own little things without doing the right kind of thing
to become open to the process.
So, these two kind of people exist everywhere in the world.
Some are waiting for gods to do things for them;
some are trying to do everything by themselves.
You are an extremely fortunate human being
if action and receptivity both have come into your life at the same time;
that you know how to perform action
everything that you can do you will do,
but you have the sense and the gracefulness to sit and wait for that which you cannot do.
So it is that dimension,
it is this combination of these two,
that we are effectively delivering through Isha Yoga,
that people learn to do something about themselves,
at the same time people learn the humility of waiting.
The devotion
devotion is needed, otherwise one cannot wait.
If you do not look up to something, you cannot wait.
So to be able to do everything that’s needed -
having the necessary tools and the empowerment to do things about your life,
at the same time having the necessary sense and grace to wait
and be able to receive,
both these things need to happen.
So if the question is pushed a little further,
the question could be, ‘Can't I do it myself?’
Or the next question could be,
‘Will your write a self-help book,
“Get yourself enlightened”?’ (Laughter)
This happened at the doctor’s office,
a woman came with her husband
who was limping and in a bad shape.
She brought him slowly;
he was leaning heavily on her.
She brought him slowly and made him sit down.
The receptionist who was sitting there,
being sympathetic to the situation,
said to the woman who brought this man,
‘Arthritis with complications, mhmm?’
The woman said, ‘No. Self-help with concrete blocks.’ (Laughter)
So self-help books sometimes have done things for people,
good things for people.
Lot of times they only injured themselves,
broke things up,
broke situations up in your life,
because self-help is not always the right thing,
but is it something that you don’t do?
No you must do.
So combination of both is best.
If you push one too far, you may lose your grounding.
If you push your receptivity too far,
not doing anything,
you do not even know whether you’re being receptive or just being lazy.
If you do… try to do everything yourself,
not allowing anything to be received
then it's like a plant which is trying to grow without sunlight.
It will grow, but pale,
it will not produce any flower or fruit.
It will be a long time before it can produce anything.
So we need a combination of both.
The kriyas,
the practices are a phenomenal way
to prepare the system to be open to new possibilities.
If your energies do not open up to new possibilities,
then you are talking about a long drawn out journey.
To become open is the most important thing.
So just believing that I am open and not doing anything about it, is no good.
There are lots of very open people,
if you say one word, tomorrow they’ll be gone.
They believe they are very open.
If… Even me,
if I make as much as one comment about them, tomorrow they’ll be gone,
that open they are. (Laughter)
So openness has to be tested with your commitment of time and effort.
How open you are, you have to prove,
every day to yourself and to the existence.
By every day putting in this much.
‘I am this open,
I am willing to give my this much of time and commitment, I’m that open.’
So your sadhana is a tool for opening you up
and also a test for your openness, both ways.
So these are inseparable,
you cannot separate them.
If you separate it,
it is an unrealistic separation,
which does not work.
Largely it does not work.
There may be a devotee who does nothing,
who just sits and receives it,
but as I said, if you become all receptivity,
it may be wonderful for you
but you won't know whether you’re going forward or backward,
that’s one thing.
Another thing is nobody would want to be around you, it's another thing; it's already so
It's already so?
Piyush Pandey: If somebody feels that he’ is putting in a lot of efforts
and his efforts are not being recognized,
how does that person motivate himself or herself to say,
‘“I don’t really give a damn as to what other people think.
I have to keep on doing what I’m doing.
I have to excel myself every day”?.’
What is the message that you would like to give people,
who feel that sometimes
their efforts do not get recognized
to the level that they think they have put in?.
Sadhguru: See these are two extremes.
“I don’t give a damn” is not going to work,
especially if you’re in the retail (Laughs). -
If you say, “I don’t give a damn”, you’ are out of business.
At the same time, thinking “my efforts are not giving the necessary result,” -
I think a whole lot of people feel this way.
I’m saying, in your assessment, you may be doing great,
but the world has to recognize too.
Somebody else has to see value to what you’re doing,
only then it’ will find recognition.
If you feel it's valuable, you’re doing it,
then don’t bother about other people’s’ recognition.
But if what you’re doing is useful to them
Let's understand this
Not because what you’re doing is great,
because what you’re doing is useful to them,
they will say, “Oh, this is wonderful.”
So, “‘I don’t give a damn,’” definitely doesn’t work.
But whether other people recognize you or not,
depending upon how useful it is at a given time to people.
That depends what is the type of job we’ve have taken up.
Now… I must say this (Laughs).
Shall I (Laughs)?
See, today, wherever I go, people are saying things,
“Oh, he is a yogi, he is a mystic.”
They don’t know a damn thing about me being a yogi or a mystic, okay (Both laugh)?.
They don’t know what is a yogi,
what is a mystic.
Now, because it's it is internationally recognized,
everybody is clapping their hands (Piyush Pandey laughs).
I’ve been saying the same things for last thirty- five years.
Nobody thought anything about it.
Now, somewhere else in America, people are clapping their hands,
here also they started clapping their hands, okay (Laughs).
It means nothing to me, all the recognition.
Some day if people truly recognize what is being a yogi
and they’ are inspired to become that, that’s wonderful.
Of course, there are many people, who are inspired by that (Applause).
But I’m telling you, even people, who are near around me, including my family,
if I were sitting under a tree, same yogi, -
no recognition in the world,
they wouldn’t think nothing of my being a yogi,
do you understand (Laughs)?.
Today, because it's internationally recognized,
everybody is saying, “This is
‘He is a great yogi.’”
They don’t know what a damn… what is damn yogi is about.
They don’t know a damn thing about it.
It is just that many people see it's useful to them.,
So there is recognition.
Let's understand this.
People are not recognizing the quality of who I am,.
They are recognizing the usefulness that I am to them.
Only that part gets recognition.
The quality of what I am,
only a handful of people would recognize that.
Rest will not even know what the hell it is (Laughs)
and it's okay (Laughs).
Piyush Pandey: I think that’s beautifully said and I think
if I was to translate that into our language out here in this room
Sadhguru: Hey, don’t use your language, hmm huh! (Laughter).
Piyush Pandey: My language of the kind that I can use in front of you (Laughter).
I would say that, keep at it as to what you’re doing.
One day, people will see the use of that in their lives.
And your time will come,
like his time came when people started clapping.
So all you retail professionals, don’t worry about what the world thinks,
keep on doing what you’re doing.
Am I right in saying that?
Sadhguru: Oh, that’s a deduction (Laughster) (Applause).
I would say that if your
if your work is an expression of your joyfulness,
whether recognition or no recognition,
what does it matter?.
You’re finding an opportunity to express your joy.
And if you look at your own lives and see –
the moments where… where you’re in pursuit of your happiness,
what is the quality of those moments,
the moments when you’re expressing your joy,
what is the quality of those moments, if you see,
you will see whenever you’re expressing your happiness or joy,
they are the best moments in your life.
If your work is an expression of your joy,
your working moments will be the best moments of your life.
What we are working towards is a policy
and the nature of the policy is such
if you pass the policy
one thing is it involves very heavy
financial outlays
another thing is there are many complexities in execution
It's not a simplistic policy
it's not something we'll all agree and okay tomorrow morning morning all solutions are on
it's not like that, there are
soil challenges, there are topographical challenges
there are cultural challenges, there are various kinds of
challenges
so it is not a simple
simply executionable policy, there are
many many complexities
any government will have to invest a lot
of both
money and brains to make this happen
even if you do it
let's say very aggressively we do it, then it will take
10 to 15 years to implement the policy
After that it will take another 5 to years
actually to see rise in waters in the rivers
If we implement the policy in the next 10 to 15 years time
for sure in the next 20 to 25 years time
the water in the rivers of our country
will rise by minimum 15 to 20 percent
Before we die we want to see that
So this means four to five governments
would have come and gone
many of the existing political leaders may not be alive
many of us may not be alive
So who is going to invest in a policy like this?
They will only invest in the policy
if the nation speaks in one voice
and says we want this to happen
this is why the missed call, missed call is your vote
We want a minimum of
30 crore people to give missed calls
I am saying 30 crore because this is nearly 40% of the electorate.
If 40% of the electorate
says we are for the
river policy
We are
a mature citizens today
As a democracy we have matured
we are not looking for freebies.
If you go for something which is long term wellbeing
of this nation, we are with you
In one voice we have to say this
otherwise no government is going to invest their time and money
in doing something which will show results 25 years later
This is not an election winning policy for sure
So ... and for all of us, there will be some pain
And we have to say we are willing to go through the pain
for long term wellbeing of this nation,
we are not irresponsible citizens who don't care what happens to
future generations, we are concerned about it
and we will do the necessary things - this is the commitment
you are making when you make this simple call
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Good morning sir.
Sadhguru: Namaskaram (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Two things I’ve never been in my life
are thin and nervous (Laughter),
and I still haven’t been able to get over the former
but the latter is still very operational at this moment (Sadhguru laughs).
It’s because I don’t know what to say
because I feel I’ve lived with you in this last week.
I’ve done all my research,
watched all your shows, from (Sadhguru laughs)
Sadhguru: See, you have
you have done your homework but
because I am homeless (Laughter), I’ve
I have not done my homework.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I have done a fair amount of my homework.
I have watched everyone from Anupam Kher to Juhi Chawla in conversation with you,
Barkha Dutt, to a very subdued Arnab Goswami as well (Laughter/Applause).
I do believe in your mystical power because you managed to achieve that
and I think that is not anything lesser of an achievement than you’ve done (Sadhguru laughs)
within your span of tremendous work, Sadhguru,
so my felicitations on that achievement (Both laugh).
And more than anything else,
when I just saw the AV that all of us saw,
I’ve heard all these terminologies associated with you,
which is from the monk on a motorcycle,
rockstar spiritual energy,
and I saw that happen.
You’re on a motorbike,
you are flying a helicopter.
So there are so many terms that I said,
rockstar spiritual energy
and I want to create my own one say you’re like almost the Santa Claus of spirituality (Laughter),
because you bring the energy through that chimney of life
and I think have really touched so many millions of people across the world.
So we are blessed to be in your presence at this moment
and I can’t wait to be in conversation, which is I am going to start.
But I just want to start by saying that this is truly an honor,
so thank you (Applause).
I mean, as a filmmaker,
as a human being,
as a member of a humanitarian community,
my head is always buzzing with so many questions
and I think we bottle it down to some spiritual inquiries,
some religious ones.
There’s always been a debate about these two terms –
religion and then spirituality.
There are people who feel like,
“I’m not religious, I’m spiritual”
and I’m not quite sure they know the meaning of that.
But they use it because sometimes terms are just thrown around.
To those people who are at the crossroad between religion and spirituality,
what is your answer to that dilemma?
Sadhguru: See, we must understand this.
It is in the very nature of human intelligence
that if you do not know something,
if you realize you do not know something –
because most people do not realize that they do not know (Laughs) –
if you realize that you do not know,
it’s very natural for your intelligence to seek to know.
It doesn’t need a guru,
it doesn’t need a scripture,
it doesn’t need somebody to introduce that to you.
It is in the nature of your intelligence that you wish to know.
There’re lots of experiments to show,
even mice, if you leave them in a place,
within two minutes they will research everything in that space –
for their own reasons of course.
For survival reasons, they,
you know, inquire into everything around them to find out how the place is.
Human intelligence goes beyond survival.
So naturally, human intelligence seeks to know many more things,
which does not concern our survival.
Yes, we are concerned about survival till a point.
But once that’s taken care of, we cannot rest.
We want to know more, endlessly more.
The more we realize we do not know,
the more the longing to know.
So this longing to know,
when it finds a very intense expression in the form of seeking,
we call this spiritual process.
Or in other words,
the basis of spirituality is a realization that, “I do not know” (Karan Johar laughs)
But the moment you say, “I’m religious”,
you refer to yourself as a believer.
When you say you’re a believer,
what you are saying is,
“Everything that I do not know, I will make it up.”
How I make it up,
whose help I seek to make it up,
may be varying from person to person.
Somebody makes it up because of… with spiritual assist
with scriptural assistance,
somebody makes it up with the assistance of a priest, or a pundit, or a guru, or whatever.
But you seek some authority.
You kind of make some compromise in your life,
that instead of truth, you settle for an authority as the truth.
Spiritual process means truth is the only authority for you,
authority is never the truth for you.
So these are two different aspects,
unfortunately spoken in the same breath most of the time.
So, I would say spiritual process is far closer to scientific inquiry.
See, even the fly is trying to investigate me (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Trust me, I am not investigating (Both laugh),
I am just inquiring
and I wish I was the size of that fly but anyway
Sadhguru: (Overlapping conversation) No, no I did not
I did not use the word investigation in a negative way,
nothing wrong with investigation.
Investigation means you want to know the truth.
Maybe it’s done little forcefully like a fly (Laughter).
He’s coming to you now (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): That’s all I get these days (Laughter).
Sadhguru: No, if you get to fly, what more (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, you manage pretty well,
I have a fear of turbulence (Both laugh),
so flying is really not on my top three things to do in life.
Sadhguru: So, spiritual process does not demand belief
because belief and spiritual process cannot go together.
Spiritual process is a constant inquiry to
It is a way of sharpening your questions,
so they dig deeper and deeper –
not into something else but into yourself,
the nature of your existence...
Because the nature of human existence is such that in our experience,
the only thing that you can experience is yourself.
You actually believe you’re experiencing many things,
but you only know everything the way it happens within you.
You do not know any other way.
Even now if you see these people,
it looks like they are there,
but actually you know them or you see them only the way they’re projected in the firmament of our minds.
There is no other way.
There is no other way for you to experience this life (Referring to oneself),
except the way it happens within you.
Now spiritual process is a constant effort to see
that the way that it happens within me
is not a distorted vision,
that my mirror is not a wonky mirror,
it is a plain mirror (Laughs),
that it shows me things
the way they… way things are,
it doesn’t distort anything.
Because of my thought,
because of my emotion,
because of my attachments,
because of my identities,
because of the philosophies and ideologies that I identify with,
I can distort my mirror.
Now, I deprive myself of all that,
so that I have a plain mirror
and I get to see everything just the way it is.
This is spiritual process.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, well, thank you because that’s always been a continued dilemma.
And I believe that the word spirituality is sometimes misused,
where there is not a grave understanding of what it really is.
And as you said, that the “I don’t know”
has immense power and I think acknowledging the “I don’t knows” of your life really means everything
and I wish people would start doing that
because according to me,
sometimes delusion is the biggest disease that plagues humanity (Sadhguru laughs),
when you’re not aware of your own self.
Sadhguru: No, there are… there are all kinds of idiots on the planet (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, we work with many of them (Laughter).
Sadhguru: But we must understand this,
in the very nature of who we are, it is such… like this,
if you do something stupid today,
tonight your intelligence will bother you, “Why did I do this?”
This is the nature of human intelligence.
But the moment your stupidity is either scripture-endorsed or god-endorsed,
you can go on doing the same idiotic thing with enormous confidence.
It gives you confidence without clarity.
Confidence without clarity is a disastrous process.
If you do not have clarity,
at least you must have hesitation (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes that’s true (Both laugh).
Well, I have to say that I was –
I want to personalize this a little bit –
I was at a crossroad about thirteen years ago
and my father was very critically ill.
And at that juncture of my life and before that,
religion was organized in my life.
It was what was taught to me.
It was what I thought the right thing to do was.
When he was in his last stage,
there were things suggested to me,
which were to me now completely ridiculous,
including going to a certain temple and feeding a cow of a certain color
and doing a certain ritual at home
and all those things that one did even without even thinking,
because as you said, when you spoke about the idiots on this planet,
I was definitely one of those in that stage in my life.
But sometimes you reach a critical stage,
where you seek any kind of desperate measure
and you try to kind of hold on to any hope,
that even something that is advocated to you
that goes against your grain of intelligence or thought.
To those people, what is your advice,
who have reached the end of their rope
and are hanging on and holding on to anything,
be it religious,
be it spiritual, or be it
an unfounded piece of advice?
Sadhguru: See, for all this,
the fundamental basis of these kind of aspirations or actions
is because people are just shit scared of life.
Why is it so?
It’s like this.
Suppose you sat on a bicycle, on stand, you know,
and started simply pedaling for fun.
But it came off the stand and started rolling –
anxiety.
Faster – fear.
Very fast – terror.
The fundamental reason is
But someone who knows how to ride a bicycle,
the faster it goes, the better it is.
But for someone who does not know how to ride a bicycle,
the moment it moves, terror will happen.
So the fundamental thing is just this.
You have been given a very complex and sophisticated vehicle
to pass through the process of this life,
which is human mechanism.
There is body, mind, emotion, energy,
many dimensions to it.
Essentially, this human mechanism is a very complex phenomena.
Now you are going at it,
you are trying to walk through life
without understanding a thing about the vehicle that you are using.
Every time it moves, there is terror.
If it doesn’t move, you want to die of boredom.
If it moves, you’re terrorized.
There is no way out of it.
Tell me one thing… Tell me one thing that human beings are not suffering?
If they are poor, they suffer poverty,
if they become rich, they suffer taxes.
If they are not educated, they suffer that,
you send them to school, endless suffering (Laughter).
They are not married, they suffer that,
you get them married (Gestures) (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, I was heading to that next.
Sadhguru: I didn’t say a thing, they are the ones (Laughter)
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, that’s an extreme validation of the institution (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: So, tell me one thing that they’re not suffering.
So now somebody develops a philosophy –
life is suffering.
You know, there are philosophies like this (Laughter).
Now it’s not about life
because you’ve not even touched life yet.
All that you’re dabbling with is right now
your own thought and emotion and it’s going crazy.
So, you are on a bicycle that you don’t know how to ride.
But this (Referring to oneself) is not just a simple two-wheeled bicycle,
it’s a complex machine.
You don’t know how to ride.
You don’t know how to manage your thought.
You don’t know how to manage your emotion.
All these things,
human experience is essentially happening from within you.
Whether it’s misery or joy,
agony or ecstasy is happening from within you.
At least what happens from within you
must happen your way, isn’t it?
The world will not happen your way.
But the problem now is
what happens within you is not happening yeur… your way.
What’s happening in your mind is a dream.
Even your dream is not happening your way,
that’s the problem (Laughs).
The problem is not that your life is not happening your way,
even your dream is not happening your way.
And this is the source of their misery
but they think it’s marriage,
they think it’s children,
they think it’s poverty –
no.
Fundamentally, it is just that you are not happening the way you want yourself to be.
That’s all your misery is.
So, even if you want to learn to ride a bicycle,
it’s a simple basic machine.
It needs a certain level of attention and involvement,
otherwise you can’t ride a bicycle.
Takes an enormous amount of intent to want to ride it,
otherwise it’s quite impossible to ride a bicycle.
After you know how to ride it, you can let your hands off,
you can close your eyes and do all these things.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Pretty much like marriage (Laughter)
because like wheels are turning but going nowhere –
at times (Laughs).
Sadhguru: No, no, I wouldn’t like to make that statement (Karan Johar laughs)
because for a many people they have gotten somewhere with marriage (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes, we’d like to find out where (Laughter),
but on another forum.
When you speak about suffering, Sadhguru,
it is definitely something that I believe
that self-pity sometimes is like a luxury spa.
It’s somewhere where your comfort lies.
Self-pity is I believe the most indulgent emotion
and gets you nowhere but makes you feel really good for a certain period of time.
What is your take on something like self-pity?
Sadhguru: How is being pitiful a luxury?
I don't understand that.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): It becomes, you know
You get great solace in that emotion (Sadhguru laughs) for a short period of time.
Self-pity can be the most happy place to be at,
like self-indulgences.
Sadhguru: See, there are many ways to achieve piece,
happiness, well-being. Tch,
this happened.
Shankaran Pillai (Laughter),
in his
he was a little abusive husband,
verbally abusive.
So he would rant at his wife but she was always peaceful,
never reacted.
One day in the middle of his raging rant,
he stopped and he asked,
“Whatever I say, how much ever I abuse you, you are peaceful.
How do you do this?”
She said, “I clean the toilet.”
He said, “What? Cleaning the toilet,
how does it make you peaceful?”
She said, “I use your toothbrush” (Laughter).
So, don’t fall on to that
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You are giving lots of people ideas (Laughter).
So that’s not a relationship,
it’s a revenge story (Laughs).
Sadhguru: No, you can achieve peace and solace in so many different ways,
I am saying (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Which is what you said,
to draw from within to find your solutions,
because the most exciting line that I read was
that life can’t touch you, can’t scratch you,
it can’t harm you,
you create your own energy in your own life.
You’re in this universe, you’ve been brought into this world
and it’s in your control, what you do with it.
Life has nothing against you. What you achieve
and what you do is a result of your own actions,
your feelings, the pleasantness that you create within yourself,
which to me was a very moving line
because it simplified a very extensive and expansive feeling of anxiety, fear
and all the turbulence that humanity goes through on a daily basis.
To me, three pillars of our existence are pretty much
family, fortune and farishta,
which is what I believe result of god, religion, everything else.
When we talk about family, Sadhguru,
there are few things that have always intrigued me
and I seek answers
or rather validation from a higher energy such as yourself.
It’s like I’ve always questioned why there’s an organic distance
between a father and son,
why there is always that angst in that relationship.
And I am sure there are many in this house
that have experienced that emotion in their own homes,
in their own environment.
Where do you think the origin of that distance came?
Sadhguru: Because every generation makes the same mistake (Laughs),
which means they’re not learning at all (Laughs).
When we say family
You know, in Italy,
family meant crime.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Crime?
Sadhguru: Yeah,
mafia was always referred to as the family.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Family.
Sadhguru: Yes. So in a way, it’s a kind of crime.
It is the most basic institution in the making of a society,
but it does not mean you must remain basic.
Because this is a biological identity that we have.
Biology is a reality, we can’t deny it.
Obviously this (Referring to oneself) was
In some way, at least to a certain extent,
our parents gave this (Referring to oneself) to us,
one part of it at least.
Today the way it is,
the way it looks is essentially because of them.
Well, it was given to them by somebody else,
that’s another point.
But to us, it was given by them.
So it’s a biological identity.
This limiting oneself to one’s biological idetity
identity for an entire lifetime
is… is a crime
because it creates so many things.
In this country
This country has suffered a lot from a long time.
Just now you released the Mahabharat video.
Entire Mahabharat is family problem.
It is Dhritarashtra syndrome.
We are still suffering (Karan Johar laughs).
“My son is best, no matter what.”
Even today we are suffering the same thing.
“My son is best and he should become the king,
no matter what.”
It’s not just...
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Some sons haven’t managed very well, some have (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: So, family is a basic identity that we are born with.
It’s a wonderful thing when you are a child
because without that family support,
you wouldn’t be who you are today in many ways, okay?
With all due respect and regard and great respect
for the family because
human creature is born in such a way
that as soon as you fall out of your mother’s womb,
you are not ready get up on your feet and do things like other creatures.
It needs a long gestation period before
a man becomes a man or a woman becomes a woman.
There is a long period,
where the incubation of family is most important and vital.
There’s no question about that.
But you’re supposed to grow beyond that identity,
but a whole lot of people just never grow beyond that identity,
for which they suffer
and sometimes if they’re born in certain places,
they make the entire nation suffer (Laughter).
You are supposed to grow out of that.
As a child, it’s most vital that you are identified with the family.
But as an adult,
you’re supposed to grow beyond your biology
because biology is the most basic identity.
One has to grow beyond that.
So having said that,
is it necessary that every father and every son has to have some kind of angst?
It is not about father and son,
it is just two men being accommodated in the same home. (Laughs)
When you were eight, ten, your father was godlike.
So this problem started after you became fifteen, sixteen,
when you want to be a man and there’s not enough space.
This big man is occupying too much space (Laughter)
and that man thinks,
“This is my space and who is this” (Laughter)?
They can’t recognize each other as father and son because
now there are
there is no father and son,
there are two men in the same house
and there’s not enough space.
This happens not in just human families.
Every creature,
whether it’s an elephant, or a buffalo, or whatever,
in every creature’s life,
this happens that
there’ll be some friction
and either the younger one goes out or the older one goes out.
This happens everywhere
because this is not a problem between father and son.
This is two men trying to share the same space
and the same woman called mother to one and wife to the other (Laughs) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Two men!
Well, that certainly breaks a strong myth
that this country has operated with
because the problem was always meant to be two women (Laughs) in the same house
and you just changed it on its head, which I believe is true,
because I believe the problem lies in the fact that two men can’t be accommodated.
Sadhguru: No, it also happens between women in a different way.
But women have a way of covering their frictions in certain way.
They do it in a certain way, in a feminine way.
Men will do it in more (Gestures) (Both laugh)
head to… head on.
Head-butting is the man’s way.
Woman’s way is different,
she will do it differently, but the friction happens.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And I feel it’s always like the mother energy of the house
that sometimes has to bear the brunt of this tussle in a family.
It’s also the other thing that
An offshoot of that thought is that I believe very strongly
that the people you love the most,
you kind of tend to dump all your anxieties, your angers,
your fears, your insecurities,
all onto that one source
that gives you the maximum love and the one that you love the most.
Why is it that we as a human race tend to do that,
tend to lumber all our negative emotions on our most positive light source?
Sadhguru: No, no, because if you try to dump it on someone on the street,
they’ll smash you up (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): So
Sadhguru: You are choosing a… a safe place.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): But is that always fair?
Sadhguru: First of all,
it’s not fair for you to carry anxieties and angsts and angers and problems within you
because
See, if I try to torture you,
you have some defense against me.
Either you will fight me, or you will run away,
or you’ll do something.
You have some kind of defense.
But if you start torturing yourself,
this (Referring to oneself) is the most helpless creature.
No
Most defenseless.
I’m telling you, even an unborn child, if you poke like this (Gestures),
he responds.
He defends himself in his own little way, okay?
But this one (Referring to oneself) is completely defenseless.
When you start poking yourself,
this (Referring to oneself) is a completely defenseless life.
So the worst kind of torture,
the lowest level of mind is one who tortures himself.
But they always think
they are the highest level of people.
“I suffer for everybody” (Karan Johar laughs).
You bloody suffer anyway (Laughter).
If there is everybody, you will dump it on them,
otherwise you’ll simply suffer (Laughs).
People come to me and say,
“Sadhguru , I can’t bear with my...
you know, my mother-in-law, she is impossible (Karan Johar laughs).
My husband, after all, her son.
My wife, oh (Karan Johar laughs), she is terror for me.
My boss, he is not even human” (Few laugh).
Like this, it goes on.
I tell them, “You come, don’t worry. I’ll give you a nice place to stay,
I’ll give you good food.
Nothing to do.
For your life, I’ll take care of you.
Only thing is, I will make some random checks on you.
When I check, you must be joyful.
If you’re miserable,
I don’t believe in feeding misery” (Laughter).
So, you leave them in one place for twenty-four hours,
you will see how they will mess themselves up.
So when you’re alone,
if you’re miserable, you are obviously in bad company (Laughter).
Now you are thinking,
“Because of this person, I am suffering,
because of that person, I am suffering.”
Just stay alone by yourself,
without any entertainment,
without texting,
without television,
without reading,
simply sit in one place
joyfully, let me see.
Most people can’t stay there for five minutes, believe me.
They are not on Facebook,
they are not on Twitter,
they’re not this thing
because they have something to say or because they have fallen in love with the world –
no.
If they stay alone, they’ll go crazy. That’s a fact.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is… I mean, sorry to break that train of thought,
but what is the solution to that kind of feeling
of just not enjoying your own space?
Sadhguru: Because we have not looked at how human mechanism works.
It is like you have a super sophisticated machine
This (Referring to oneself) the super-super computer out of
This (Referring to oneself) is the machine, which dripped super-computers, isn’t it?
I am asking, have you read the user’s manual (Karan Johar laughs)?
That’s all it is.
The entire yogic system is just this.
This is not a philosophy,
this is not an ideology,
this is not a religion,
this is not a teaching,
this is just the user’s manual.
How to
How your body should sit,
how it must breathe,
how the mind should be,
how the emotions should be,
how the energy should be,
what are the things you can do with it,
how should you keep it so that this (Referring to oneself)
will function at its highest possible level?
See, the cellphone companies have been doing some research a few years ago
and they found
only seven percent
or only three percent of the people
no,
ninety-seven percent of the people are using only seven percent of the cellphone’s capability.
We are not even talking about today’s smartphones,
we’re talking about the dumb phones.
So ninety-seven percent of the people are using only seven percent of a small gadget.
If that is the fact,
how much do you believe are people making use of this tremendous gadget (Referring to oneself)?
Just on the surface because they are never bothered to read the user’s manual.
If you tell them this, they say,
“Sadhguru, can you give us the user’s manual?”
It’s written into you.
You have to spend some time with this (Referring to oneself) (Karan Johar laughs).
This was written by the source of creation,
not by me or you, isn’t it?
You must learn to read.
The problem is illiteracy.
See, suppose you are… you do not… you have not learnt the alphabet.
Well, you have learnt English alphabet.
Let’s say I’ll give you a Tamil book.
You look at it, does it make any sense to you?
You don’t know the alphabet, it doesn’t make a… doesn’t mean a thing to you
because you do not know the alphabet.
Now, this is the problem, that in today’s society,
in modern education,
we have not even brought fundamental literacy
towards how to read this book (Referring to oneself).
Because we’ve never read this (Referring to oneself),
by accident we are managing it.
If you manage by accident, sometimes it works,
sometimes it doesn’t work.
One moment you are happy,
next moment you are miserable.
One moment you are peaceful,
another moments you are in turmoil.
I was (Laughs) – you know,
I’ll cut the long story short –
I was in Tel Aviv and somebody came and greeted me,
“Shalom.”
I said, “What does that mean?”
He said, “This is the highest way of greeting.”
I said, “That’s your opinion but what does it mean?”
He said, “No, no, no, this is really the highest way of greeting.”
I said, “All right but what does the word mean?”
He said, “It means peace.”
Then I say,
“Why is peace the highest way of greeting unless you are born in Middle East” (Laughter)?
In South India,
you come up to me in the morning and say, “Peace!”
I will ask, “What’s wrong with you” (Laughter)?
I am saying if you deprive yourself of something for a long time,
suddenly it becomes godlike.
If you have not eaten for ten days,
even if god appeared,
what’s the prayer (Karan Johar laughs)?
Food, of course.
So,
once you deprive yourself of fundamental things
I am saying fundamental things because
to be peaceful and joyful is not the ultimate goal of life.
If you want to enjoy your meal, you must be peaceful and joyful.
If you want to enjoy your friend, you must be peaceful and joyful.
If you want to enjoy your walk on the street, you must be peaceful and joyful.
If you want to enjoy simple things that you do in your life,
you must be at least peaceful and joyful, if not ecstatic.
So it is a most fundamental requirement.
This is not happening.
People are saying this is the ultimate goal of life.
Even so-called spiritual leaders are saying,
“Peace is the ultimate goal of life.”
Such people will only rest in peace (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): In what I believe surrounds us all is urban angst –
I think that seems to be terminology that comes out of mental health solutions, et cetera.
And that seems to be rampant in many parts of the world now,
including now slowly penetrating even in India,
when people deal with mental health issues
like depression and anxiety.
And those.... seek certain chemical imbalance issues that are told to them about
Sadhguru: Hey, they’re making you look very pretty on the screen.
How do they do that?
They’re not doing it to me (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): They are making my what? My (Laughs)?
Sadhguru: Look at yourself there.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Am I looking pretty on screen?
Sadhguru: Yeah, yeah. See (Laughter)
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Okay (Laughter/Applause)!
Sadhguru: They’re not doing that to me (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You are actually looking stunning to me, Sir (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Stunning is another word for shocking (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, I was trying to find another adjective to counter that (Laughter).
But back to me and my mental health issue (Laughter),
I really want to know,
it’s such an order of the day today,
everyone seems to kind… It’s almost
And I hate to say this with any
and I don’t say this with any kind of disrespect to people’s personal circumstance,
but I almost feel like today it’s talked about
like it’s almost a fashionable issue,
where I think it’s a very serious issue,
when people talk about mental health issues
like depression and anxiety
and seek counseling to sort those issues out.
And then the diagnosis at times is chemical imbalance
and medication is given.
What
And then your
Well, I know you hate the word philosophy,
but all your teachings are definitely about finding yourself
and seeking that pleasantness from within.
But to those who are not strong enough to achieve that and seek this assistance,
what is your take on that?
Sadhguru: Let me correct one more thing in the question.
This is
This is not a teaching,
this is just a technology.
I am just giving people simple methods
with which they can work.
If people are coming for a teaching,
they’re frustrated with me
because every time they come, they leave more confused than ever before (Few laugh).
If they look
If they are more confused, in a way my job is done
because (Karan Johar laughs)
my entire work is to get them out of silly conclusions (Karan Johar laughs)
that they have made about life.
And confusion means you are still looking.
You have an active intelligence.
Conclusions means
What is the conclusion of your life?
Hello?
What is the conclusion of your life?
You don’t know?
Let me reveal the suspense to you.
Though as a filmmaker he won’t tell you till the end (Laughter),
I will reveal it to you
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Sometimes we don’t even know what happens after that so (Laughter).
Many of us are confused souls when we make movies.
Sadhguru: So, the conclusion of your life is you’ll be dead (Laughter).
You think something else is going to happen to you (Laughter/Applause)?
You’ll be just dead, that’s all is the conclusion.
So every time you make a conclusion,
in some way you die. You need to understand this.
You kill something of yourself every time you make a conclusion.
This is you in a state of committing suicide in installments.
You may call this religion,
you may call this philosophy,
you may call this being socially whatever.
But fundamentally you’re committing suicide in installments.
This is why
when you look at a child and yourself,
you are less alive than a child.
As you grow up, should you become more alive or less alive?
Unfortunately, most adults are less alive than children, isn’t it?
You must be more alive
but unfortunately you’re less alive.
Maybe your physical agility will go down with age
but your aliveness need not go down.
Aliveness is going down because
you’re continuously making conclusions and conclusions and conclusions.
As you conclude, you become less and less alive.
You know that there is that famous parable,
which is all over the place,
about Adam and Eve.
It seems god told them
it’s a dumb couple.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Kind of (Sadhguru laughs).
Look at what we had to suffer as a result of them (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: No, no, not because of that,
because they didn’t know what to do with each other (Laughter).
So, god told them,
“You eat whatever you want, but don’t eat from this particular tree.”
You know what tree that was?
Participant: Apple.
Sadhguru: No, apple means in old English just a fruit.
Participant: Knowledge.
Sadhguru: What… Knowledge.
Your parents tell you, you must eat the fruit of knowledge.
Your teachers insist that you must eat the fruit of knowledge.
Everybody in the society
always trying to shove knowledge down your throat.
But in… it seems god told you not to eat the fruit of knowledge
and by eating that,
that Adam and Eve fell.
It is not about that Adam and that Eve,
it’s about every Adam and every Eve.
The moment you eat the fruit of knowledge, you fall
because your idea of a knowledge is
the conclusions that you make about everything in the universe (Applause).
So this mental illness which is becoming pandemic
They are telling me –
I don't know how far these statistics are right –
they are telling me
over forty people, particularly women in America,
over forty years of age,
nearly fifty-two percent of them are on some kind of antidepressants.
Fifty-two percent is not a joke.
Fifty-two percent is not a joke (Laughs).
It means entire humanity is becoming sick.
We must look at it, why?
Fundamentally,
because you are banking on a few things for a long time
for your mental stability and emotional stability.
All these things are taken away.
One thing is, as you mentioned
the crime that we call as family,
it gave us the support.
No matter what happened, there was somebody always for you.
Others are with you when you do the right things.
If you do the wrong thing, they’ll distance themselves.
There was one bunch of people,
who was like a… for the circus that you do,
they were the net.
Whichever way you fall,
there’s somebody to hold you for some moments.
But that net is gone.
Now when you fall, you fall.
Because of that, people are cracking up.
So if you want to remove
See, in this culture,
there was a time in the tradition,
where thirty percent of India’s population were monks.
That means consciously they went beyond family.
Consciously they chose to live without family,
to live without support,
to live without a home.
Homelessness not out of deprivation but by choice.
Nobody ever had a depression (Laughs)
because they transcended the need for the net.
You learnt your trapeze bar act really well,
now you can do it without the net.
You are not good at it, you better have a net, isn’t it (Laughs)?
Otherwise your head will crack.
Right now, that’s all that’s happening.
The traditional support system that we had,
we’re taking it off.
When we talked about religion,
with all due respect, we must acknowledge this.
Today people are trying to go to psychiatrists.
India doesn’t have enough psychiatrists for one-billion people, believe me.
No country has. And above all, they’re very inefficient
because they can take only one client at a time
and they need lot of furniture like this (Few laugh).
It’s very inefficient.
Religion handled human psychological balance effortlessly.
“God is with you, don’t worry.”
It settled a whole lot of people.
Do not underestimate the value of that.
It is very inexpensive mass psychiatry,
where people (Karan Johar laughs)
No people
No, no, I’m not
This is not a joke.
When you are mentally ill, it’s not a joke.
It’s a most painful thing.
If you get physical ailments, you will get everybody’s compassion.
When you get mental ailment, you’ll get laughter, you know, unfortunately.
Because you don’t know when somebody is sick
and when somebody is being stupid. Tch,
you can’t make out.
This is the biggest problem
for those families, who have somebody in the family, who is mentally disturbed.
You don’t know when they are making it up,
when they are really suffering.
You can’t make out.
There is no perfect way.
There is no science anywhere to tell you exactly when
because human beings can make up every kind of thing.
You are an actor, you know.
I don't know, you… you are actor or…?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I do most things, yeah.
Sadhguru: Okay (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): We act even in our day-to-day existence, all of us do (Laughs).
Sadhguru: No, that is fine, but are you actor? Just director?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, no. I tried, I failed (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Okay. So, all right, you are a bad actor (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah.
But I am an actor nonetheless.
Sadhguru: But at least you make other people act?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes.
Sadhguru: So, you know, in a cinema or drama, you can act something
and make it really real to a point,
where these 10000 people will sit and experience like it’s real.
So, when a mentally ill person is in your home,
you don’t know whether he’s acting it up or it’s real.
Sometimes it’s real,
sometimes he’s playing with it.
You can’t make out.
You don’t know when to be compassionate,
when to be hard on him.
This is the biggest problem for people, who have mentally ill
people in... within their homes.
This is the huge problem
because there is no perfect way of making a judgment.
And it is not joke.
See, human sanity is a very fragile thing.
The line between sanity and insanity is so thin.
If you push it every day, you will cross it.
See, when you get angry, what do you say,
what’s the expression?
“I am mad with you” or “I am mad right now.”
So you are enjoying that little bit of madness.
You crossed the line and it felt like
it’s some kind of a freedom and power.
But one day when you cannot cross back,
that is when suffering begins.
And suffering means,
it’s not like physical pain,
it’s immense suffering.
I have been around people who have been mentally ill,
trying to help them.
It is
Nobody should have it.
But unfortunately, it’s becoming an epidemic in the world,
that mental illnesses are growing like never before
because all the supports they had we are pulling it out
without replacing it.
If people become so conscious and so capable within themselves,
you pull all the supports, everything will be fine.
But without giving that competence,
you just pull the supports,
people will crack.
In the Western societies, it’s happening large scale.
We are not going to be far behind.
Especially the urban societies in India will move in this direction
because once again in many ways,
urban India is more West than West.
There are more people in denims here than in America (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, no, thank you, thank you for that
because I know it is definitely a crisis that plagues us
and some, as I said, seek help.
Some who are helped,
I am happy for them and I am sure grateful for resources that are available.
And those that find pleasantness within themselves,
I think that truly is a glorious solution to their issues
Sadhguru: See, when we say pleasantness,
human pleasantness can be looked at in many different ways.
One simple way of looking at it –
because medical science is looking at it that way,
I don’t see it that way,
but that’s a consequence for me
– is every human experience has a chemical basis to it.
What you call as peace, joy, love, turmoil, tranquility, agony, ecstasy,
everything has a chemical balance… chemical basis to it.
Even health and ill health has a chemical basis to it.
Today entire pharmacology is just about
trying to manage your health by using chemicals.
It’s a… Today or… a doctor’s or a physician’s job is,
it’s an orchestra of chemistry that he’s trying to manage.
Put this pill, something more happened,
put that pill,
then something less happened, then do this, do that –
trying to manage the orchestra of chemistry because
this (Referring to oneself) is the most complex chemical factory on the planet.
This (Referring to oneself) is a very complex chemical factory.
Managing it from outside is (Laughs) very, very difficult.
But you could manage it from inside,
but you must have access to your insides
If your innards are not available to you,
then how do you manage it from inside?
You only try to manage it from outside.
All, even mental illness is a largely being managed by chemical input.
But all the chemicals that you can think of on this planet
are in some way already present in this (Referring to oneself).
Whether you are seeking medically prescribed drugs
or you’re going for the backstreet drugs,
whatever you are going,
essentially you are trying to bring pleasantness within yourself
because health means one level of pleasantness.
If… If body becomes pleasant, we call this health.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call this pleasure.
If your mind becomes pleasant, we call this peace.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call this joy.
If your emotions become pleasant, you call this love.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call it compassion.
If your very energies become pleasant, we call this bliss.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call it ecstasy.
If your surroundings become pleasant, we call this success (Applause).
So, we are trying to manage pleasantness by putting chemicals.
To what extent means –
these statistics are out now –
in United States,
they are saying seventy percent of the population
is on some kind of prescription medication.
The (Laughs) most affluent country, where there is enormous choice of nourishment
and lifestyles,
here seventy percent are on prescription medication.
So you are trying to manage your sanity and your health
by putting chemicals from outside.
But there is no doubt in anybody’s mind today
that this (Referring to oneself) is the greatest chemical factory
, but right now ill-managed.
Essentially, you are a lousy CEO (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): That is true.
What has always, Sadhguru, has also left me in wonderment at times about
the usage of two words,
which I am going to say it to you right now.
Terminology sometimes has a tendency of making you
even receive an emotion from within.
Two words being ego and self-respect.
Now these are two pillars of (Sadhguru laughs)
what we believe is self-confidence,
which is unfounded, I believe.
Ego
Sadhguru: Hey, who put a cow next to me (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Sorry?
Sadhguru: Who put a cow next to me?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Put a (Laughs)
Well, topical at least (Both laugh).
It’s part of the décor or something.
Sadhguru: Because everywhere I go,
people have been asking me questions about Gau Rakshak,
Gau Rakshak (Referring to members of the Bhartiya Gau Raksha Dal, a Hindu nationalist right-wing federation of cattle protection movements in India).
Now they put a cow next to me (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, I was planning not to go down that path but now (Sadhguru laughs)
then since you brought it up (Laughs)
No, no, not going there.
As I was saying about ego and self-respect,
like we always say,
like my belief has always been that maintain your self-respect, keep that,
your ego can be flexible
because it should be convenient (Sadhguru laughs)
because I believe like your ego should be a function of your convenience (Laughs).
How true is that or maybe both are unfounded?
Sadhguru: This ego should be a function of your convenience is perfect,
but nobody knows where ego is within themselves.
Do you know?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No.
Sadhguru: Nobody knows.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): It arises at will, I think.
Sadhguru: No, no, no. Ego is a fall guy.
When you do the good things, it’s of course it’s you who did it.
When you do nasty things
“Oh, it was my ego.”
He is a fall guy.
He comes up whenever something goes wrong (Karan Johar laughs).
Whenever you are seen in a bad light,
“It was my ego, it’s not me.”
So, people have created a whole
lot of jargon like this,
“my ego, my self,
my consciousness,
my super-consciousness” many things.
First everybody must decide
Within this body of yours, how many people are residing, you must tell me (Laughter/Applause).
If there is anything more than one,
it means you… either you are schizophrenic or you are possessed (Laughter).
You need either a psychiatrist or an exorcist (Laughter).
So you are an individual.
An individual means not further divisible –
indivisible.
This is why you are an individual.
That means there is only one.
This is the healthiest state to be, that you understand
there is only you here,
nobody else but you,
if you realize this,
then you will function completely differently.
But you start playing this game –
whenever you are in difficulty, you say, “It was my ego”,
whenever something else happens, you say, “It’s myself”,
another time you say, “my lower self, higher self” (Karan Johar laughs),
all kinds of stuff,
many identities within you.
See, this is the nature of a criminal – alias, alias, alias, alias, you know?
So, it’s a crime that you started.
Whether you will be caught in the web of that or you will manage doing
See, if you do minimal amount of crime, you may manage.
Only when you really get into it,
then you may get into the web.
Otherwise, many people commit small-time crime
and then become very respectable in the society (Both laugh).
So, if you do little crime of ego business, self business,
all this and then become normal, you’re okay.
But if you play it too much,
you will become mentally ill.
Because if there is more than one in this (Referring to oneself),
you will become sick.
There you are an individual, you are just one.
Now it’s very easy to transform this (Referring to oneself).
You can’t transform a crowd of people.
You can only transform individual people (Laughs).
And if you take away this fall guy,
one fundamental thing you have to do with yourself is
to see that no matter what happens in my life,
if pleasant things happen,
if unpleasant things happen,
whether I am joyful or miserable,
I’m successful or a failure,
you know it’s just you,
you and you alone.
Otherwise, when things happen well, “Me”,
when things don’t happen well (Karan Johar laughs)
Interviewer (Karan Johar): So you say we always tend to blame ourselves into various parts
and then divine forces as well.
Sadhguru: It’s convenient,
it’s very convenient.
But this self-respect –
no, no, you should have no self-respect.
Others (Karan Johar laughs)
Respect is from another person.
“I respect myself” –
what is this rubbish (Laughter/Applause)?
Somebody else respects you because they see some value to you, it’s nice (Karan Johar laughs).
But “I respect myself” – what is this?
This is (Laughs)
This is… It’s gone further in the West
and people say, “I love myself.”
See, to respect, to love,
the very word they are using is
there must be two.
You can love somebody,
somebody can love you.
You can respect somebody, somebody can respect you.
But “I love myself, I respect myself”,
this terminology is the terminology of the insane.
But it’s becoming popular
because the numbers are growing (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): By the hour (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: Hey, don’t say by the hour (Karan Johar laughs),
then we will be blamed (Laughter).
By the day (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): By the day, okay, we get that,
we sign seal and deliver that (Both laugh).
Is there a ceiling to extremity,
to extreme emotion like love?
When you love something,
is there a time that you have to stop?
Is there any such thing as stopping the extent of your extreme emotion?
And I feel that about even the negative emotions.
When you love someone,
how do you really stop the extent of it?
Sadhguru: I would say
Please, I want you to listen to this carefully because
you will immediately tweet,
“Sadhguru said this” (Laughter).
It’s a dangerous world today.
If you love, love strong.
If you hate, hate strong.
Whatever the hell you do, live strong.
It’s very important.
Otherwise, you will live an insipid life (Applause),
not knowing a thing about anything.
In
When Adiyogi gave the yogic principles,
he said anything in your life,
it doesn’t matter what
I have been telling people, they’re not grasping it,
they think...
Because too much this, you know, what to say,
flowery teachings have gone into people,
they’re not looking at what works and what doesn’t work,
they want something pretty.
I am not interested in what’s pretty and not pretty.
Whether it works or not is the only thing.
Ultimately, what works is very fantastic (Laughs).
So, even if it’s anger –
not necessarily love or compassion,
even if it is anger – just stay on it for twenty-four hours.
Anybody, I’m saying just try this by yourself.
Twenty-four hours stay intensely angry, let me see.
Believe me, at the end of twenty-four hours or well before that,
you will be enlightened.
But you will see you are not capable of being angry
because to stay intensely angry,
you need enormous energy.
It burns you up.
Try one day,
twenty-four hours stay angry.
You are irritated, that you can manage for the rest of your life (Laughter).
Stay angry, really super angry for twenty-four hours,
let me see.
You can’t manage more than three minutes, believe me.
You will feel drained out because it takes enormous energy.
There are yogis, who live like this.
They are simply angry all the time.
All the time. Not about anybody or anything,
simply angry, just like that.
It works wonderfully.
It works much better and quicker than love.
Only thing is,
with that kind of practice within you,
with that kind of emotion within you,
you can’t live in social atmospheres.
You’ll have to withdraw to a mountain cave
and simply be angry about nothing.
Just like that.
If you want to live in social atmospheres,
you need to be in a pleasant state of emotion,
otherwise you will get into constant mess.
So “Should I stop myself somewhere?”
What you are asking is,
“Should I be constipated about my love” (Laughter)?
At least in love, know some sense of abandon,
that there is no brakes on it.
I would say on everything in your life
In your car, you must pull out all the pedals,
only throttle should be there.
Yes.
In your life, there should be only throttle
because brake will happen when you die.
It’s not for you to brake every day (Applause).
It’s not for you to control.
Your life will be curtailed somewhere,
that’s nature’s business.
Your business is to be full on because
life… life needs your support.
Death is super-efficient.
Did you ever see death happening inefficiently?
Hello (Laughter)?
Wherever it happened it was a perfect death, isn’t it (Karan Johar laughs)?
Never happened inefficiently
but life happens inefficiently.
Life needs constant support.
Death does not need your support.
Stopping something is death in a way.
So to love, you’re afraid,
to laugh, you’re afraid,
to cry you’re afraid,
to everything.
Nothing is done with abandon, everything with constipation (Karan Johar laughs).
Learn to do something with abandon because
if you do not know at least how to scream in abandon,
there is no way you will ever know how to meditate
or to be spiritual,
because spirituality is a state of total abandon,
complete state of abandon (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I endorse that
and I will try and live by that.
But what happens when a positive emotion reaches its extreme stage (Sadhguru laughs)
and ventures into a dark area?
Like love can also transfer itself into obsession.
Sadhguru: See,
you are referring to
See, it’s like this.
Suppose you don’t have legs
and if I say, “Come, dance”,
you say, “No, I cannot even walk without my crutch.”
So “I cannot walk without my crutch”
or “I cannot live without you” are not different.
This is a very dangerous territory I am entering (Few applaud).
But it is a fact.
“I cannot walk without a crutch”
or “I cannot live without you” is the same thing
because you’re misunderstanding your dependence
and a certain relationship that you hold with somebody as love.
Let’s look at this thing of what is love.
See, it’s a certain blossoming within you.
Now, who are you in your life,
who are you using as the manure?
Filth.
See, this flower is fragrant,
not because somebody sprayed perfume to the roots.
It is fragrant because somebody put filth to the roots, isn’t it?
So now, you found a little flower within you of love.
Who is your manure?
Who is your filth?
Now this is a dangerous territory for me to enter with you also (Laughter).
But this is exactly what we are doing.
Now the question is just this.
Whatever is the most pleasant emotion within you,
are you capable of bringing it on by yourself,
or are you in a dilapidated condition of technology,
that you are a push start machine,
that somebody has to push you,
otherwise you cannot be?
Your joy, your love, your peace, your ecstasy
must be your making, isn’t it?
So now, your love will become about sharing your joy,
not squeezing joy out of somebody.
Right now, most people’s joy, most people’s idea of a love affair
is more like a mutual benefit scheme (Karan Johar laughs),
“You give me this, I’ll give you that.
You can’t live without me, I can’t live without you.”
They will make sure that the other person also becomes invalid
and cannot live without me.
Yes.
This is a very… a very huge problem in the human societies.
Love is not happening as a flowering,
it is something that we are trying to suck out of somebody.
Love is not about somebody.
I want you to know this.
Maybe because you’re a film personality maybe
You said you are not an actor but
there are many actors, who are loved by people.
People are in… drooling with ecstasy simply looking at them.
But the problem is they’ve never seen them.
They’ve only seen that play of light and sound.
They’ve never seen them but they love them.
So what I am saying is,
you are capable of loving somebody, that person may not exist,
he may be animated.
But you still love and you are experiencing all the fruits of love.
I am saying, love is something that you do within yourself
and blame it on somebody (Both laugh).
You can do it by yourself.
For a long time in this country, it’s been there.
There have been Meerabais and Tukarams and others.
They taught you, you don’t have… To love and to be in an extreme state of love,
you don’t need anybody.
You can simply do it by yourself.
And not just in emotion,
even physical ecstasies happened to them,
simply because they are in a great love affair
with someone who is not even here, all right?
So, it is something that you do within yourself.
Right now, you are in love with somebody here,
that somebody may not even know that you love them,
but you can experience this, isn’t it?
You don’t need the support from the other person.
This is an experience that’s happening within you.
Love is within you if you wish.
It is not that it’s sitting within you.
There is no such thing.
You are capable of variety of emotions.
If you want, you can make it's very sweet emotion.
If you are in a very sweet state of emotion,
people say, “Oh, he’s very loving.”
You may not be loving in the real context of how they understand,
but you are in a pleasant state of emotion,
so naturally you do pleasant things.
So people think you love them.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): So make love an island, not a country.
Sadhguru: No, no. Make love the universe, not an island (Applause).
Because right now, when you say “I love you”,
this particular person, you only,
when I look at these people, I look at them like this (Gestures),
this one person, ahh (Laughter)!
This is an island love (Laughter).
It is too discriminatory.
This one face in these 10000 faces I love,
rest (Gestures), depressing looking at them.
This is a very island love.
I know you are in an island city,
but it’s time (Laughter)
Interviewer (Karan Johar): To go beyond.
Sadhguru: …it’s time that you understand
love is a happening within you.
Maybe somebody stimulated this,
you are grateful for them
that they ignited this within you.
But love affair is yours, isn’t it?
It’s an inner experience that’s happening to you.
Somebody is providing the stimulus.
We are grateful to them, that they are providing this,
but they are not causing it.
It’s been caused from within.
And once you understand this,
why wouldn’t you be walking on the street lovingly?
Why wouldn’t you look at a tree lovingly?
Why wouldn’t you look at a buffalo lovingly?
Why wouldn’t you look at the cloud lovingly?
Because it is not something that’ll get over.
“Should I control it?”
Why?
Will it get over?
There is no such danger.
It doesn’t get over.
In fact, almost everything that you experience,
the more you exercise it, the more it’s available to you.
Whether it’s your love, or joy, or hate, or anger,
the more you exercise it, the more it’s available to you
because it’s after all your making.
It’s entirely your making.
So when it’s your making,
why don’t you enjoy it every moment of your life?
Somebody is there, nobody is there,
what is the problem (Karan Johar laughs)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, that brings me to… I think the
I believe the mother of a virus that plagues a large part of humanity is expectation.
I have a simple theory that I try to expect less
because then I feel that I’ll be disappointed less (Sadhguru laughs).
And I feel to curtail your expectation is possibly the toughest thing to do
because we constantly expect from relationships,
from the work we do, from...
Sadhguru: You are just talking to the wrong guy about this expectation (Karan Johar laughs).
I have the highest expectation of every human being on the planet (Applause)
and I know… and I know they will disappoint me.
I will die disappointed but joyfully disappointed (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Now joyful disappointment is a place, Sir, that you’ve reached (Laughs).
But that is not a easy place to reach for most of us.
Sadhguru: No, no, no.
See, these things are not like that.
To be joyful or miserable is essentially your choice.
It’s a choice that you are making within yourself.
Maybe it’s an unconscious choice.
Anything that you do unconsciously
Right now, unconsciously my hand can fly.
But what I can do unconsciously,
I can do the same thing definitely consciously also, isn’t it? Tch,
this is the fundamental difference between being human and every other creature.
We are not doing anything different from what they are doing.
We are doing the same things,
but we do it little more consciously.
Suddenly it’s a different affair altogether.
Same things –
we eat, they eat,
they sleep, we sleep,
they reproduce, we reproduce,
they die, we die.
Only thing is we are doing it little more consciously,
suddenly it looks like another world by itself.
We think we are above them
only because we can do the same silly little things little more consciously.
So, if I can move my hand unconsciously,
I can also move it consciously.
If I can become joyful unconsciously,
I can also become joyful consciously.
If I am joyful because of my choice,
suppose disappointments are thrown at me,
I will be joyfully disappointed (Karan Johar laughs).
And my expectations of people are very, very high.
I have an impossible expectation,
so I know I will die joyfully, blissfully disappointed
because I know the nature of the world very well.
I am not somebody who lives in fancy la-la land (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): So, abundant love and no curtail on expectation.
Sadhguru: Oh
See, love is not a quantity, it’s a quality.
It is not that if you do certain amount of things, you are loving.
There is no such thing.
You can sit here, eyes closed, not look at anybody
and still be loving because
it’s essentially pleasantness of your emotion.
How pleasant?
I am asking, is there any need to curtail pleasantness within you?
Now I am super pleasant,
but if a child came,
I may grab him and put him on my lap.
If an adult comes, you don’t do that (Laughter).
I’ll do this (Gestures namaskar), okay.
Here dog came, I’ll just do this (Gestures petting).
But an adult comes, another person comes, you don’t do this (Gestures petting) to them.
I am saying your expression will change from person to person,
from relationship to relationship,
what kind of intimacy and what kind of closeness you have with people.
But does it mean to say that you should not this (Gestures)
with as much love as you hug somebody or kiss somebody?
Should you not?
Should you not do namaskaram with as much love as you hugged your child?
Why not, I am asking?
Because there is no
See, this… I’m… I’m trying to demolish the word abundance because
when you say abundance, there is also scarcity.
There is no such thing.
It is neither abundant nor scarce.
If you are willing, it’s on,
if you are not willing, it’s off, that’s all (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): As simple as that (Applause).
Fundamentally, there is always a need,
a need for so many things.
Even when… in your process,
your professional process or where you garner wealth or income
and you keep going,
there is a need to constantly get more than what you have.
There is no satisfaction and a place to stop.
Is there an end to need?
Sadhguru: No, no, no.
There should not be an end.
It is just that
Now that you are asking this question,
in some way you have realized that at every point of your life,
you thought, “This is it. If this one thing happens, I am fulfilled”,
but the very next day you realize that this is not it, there is one more thing and one more thing,
and you know that after ten years still the same state will continue.
So this means you are ready for yoga (Laughter/Applause).
This means you have understood that your longing is not for more,
your longing is for all.
Your longing to expand is not just for more, it is for all.
Or in other words,
your longing is in some way for infinite expansion.
If you handle your infinite expansion unconsciously
and if it finds a very basic physical expression,
we call this sexuality.
What you are trying to do is,
something that is not you,
with physical contact you are trying to make it a part of yourself.
You know it doesn’t work.
If you try emotionally, we call this love.
Emotionally you are trying to include something which is not you as a part of yourself,
this is your love affair.
If you do it mentally, this gets labeled as greed,
ambition, conquest or simply shopping (Both laugh).
If you do it consciously, then we call this yoga.
Yoga means union.
You’re longing to expand infinitely
but because of little constipation in the head,
you are going in installments.
Can you go in installments and become infinite, I am asking?
Is it possible?
Can you count one, two, three, four and one day say infinity?
No, you will become endless counting.
So your longing is not for this much or that much.
Your longing is for everything.
If you want everything, you must understand that
you cannot do that physically.
It can only happen in a dimension beyond physical
because physicality exists only because of defined boundaries.
But there is something within you, which doesn’t like this boundary,
which wants to stretch the boundary,
stretch the boundary,
stretch the boundary.
You are looking for boundlessness,
but you are not courageous enough or conscious enough to admit this.
You want to go in installments.
No. What you are looking is for boundlessness.
If you want boundlessness,
it can never ever happen through physical means.
So once it doesn’t happen through physical means,
now you use the most corrupted word called spiritual.
Spiritual does not mean looking up or looking down,
going here, going there.
It simply means your experience of life transcended the limitations of being just physical.
Because everything that’s physical about you is an acquired quantity, isn’t it?
This is just a piece of this planet.
What is up here is just a heap of impressions that you have gathered.
So what you have acquired can be yours,
can never be you.
So this longing to have more money,
more property,
more pleasure,
more something is not about those things.
You are trying to find that dimension beyond physical nature.
But because of constipation, it’s not happening (Laughs) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I’m going to take the liberty, Sadhguru,
to do what I normally do on my television show,
which is a rapid fire round.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): The… Normally the end of this round
Sadhguru: (Overlapping conversation) See, I’ve… When I was young,
I watched a lot of, you know,
Wild West movies (Karan Johar laughs).
When you fire, I also fire, all right (Laughter/Applause)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, but I promise you,
this is not that kind of
you are not in my line of fire (Sadhguru laughs) at all.
I will not take the liberty of being that person (Laughs).
These are just quick questions, which when I ask for one word,
you have to stick to that
because sometimes you have a tendency of not exactly answering the question asked (Laughter).
But you give such a profound and prolific retort back
that it makes you very satiated.
But in this case,
my only request is that if it’s one word,
then it’s just one word (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Okay.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And the end of this normally,
you get a hamper (Laughter).
But in the absence of a hamper here,
you already have
Sadhguru: A cow (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): …something right… Yes.
So (Laughs)… And… Or this beautiful bouquet that is right next to you.
But so there is no hamper
but you do will get my utmost gratitude (Both laugh).
Thank you.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): All right, very simply,
what is the one thing that is essential to living a balanced life?
Sadhguru: Sense (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is the one thing we must absolutely do away with in order to lead a balanced life?
Sadhguru: Senselessness (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): All right,
I thought that was coming.
First thing that comes to your mind when I say the following –
the first thing. Organized religion.
Sadhguru: Madness.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Marriage.
Sadhguru: Cohabitation (Karan Johar laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Competition.
Sadhguru: Stupid.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Money.
Sadhguru: Useful.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Love.
Sadhguru: Can I say a sentence (Laughter/Applause)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes.
I will allow that (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Most beautiful but unfortunately crippling for most people (Applause).
If I can little elaborate that
See, if something unpleasant cripples you,
something nasty cripples you, tch,
it’s acceptable.
When something beautiful cripples you,
it’s a true disaster (Laughs) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): If you could ask one person alive or dead,
one question,
who would you ask and what would that be (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: I really sorted out all my questions
because I did not spend time educating myself or doing anything,
I spent my entire life sorting out every damn question I had.
I kind of run out of questions (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And you certainly have not run out of any answers (Laughter)
and you never will.
Best advice you have ever received?
Sadhguru: Nothing.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Never?
Sadhguru: No. I never sought, nor did I receive.
I made myself in such a way,
I’m incapable either of seeking advice or giving advice (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): In an imaginary,
completely hypothetical situation,
if you had a day off with no commitments,
no responsibilities,
what would you spend the day doing?
Sadhguru: Oh! There’re lot of things,
this can't be one word (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, it’s not one word.
Sadhguru: See, I have an indiscriminate sense of passion towards everything.
There were lots and lots of things I did at one time
but these days, time is not allowing me to do that.
So generally if I have little time, all I do is play golf
because that’s safe and within the city and I can get back in time for something else to be done.
But if an entire day is left to me –
which they have not done for a long time (Laughs),
they’ve not left it to me –
if that happens, I will close my eyes and sit
because that is my... the best... the best...
I am at my best when I truly have nothing to do (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is one thing you’d like people to remember about you at the end of your life?
Sadhguru: They must live so wonderfully that they don’t even remember me (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): If you found a way to travel through time, where would you go?
Sadhguru: I’m kind of done with all those things (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You’re universe visited already,
you have visas for every part (Laughs) of this ecosystem.
Sadhguru: If we can do some slow fire...
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah.
Sadhguru: ...because that’s a question with many ramifications.
This...
For example, traveling in the world,
we’ve jetted around and now we want to travel to the Mars,
we want to travel to another place.
And now that’s not enough,
we want to travel into the past and future.
All this longing is again exploratory in nature.
Whether you go on vacation to Maldives
or you want to go to Mars,
it is fundamentally exploratory.
Maybe you’re also thinking of relaxation and pleasure and whatever,
but essentially it’s exploratory,
otherwise why can’t you do it here?
It’s something that you want to do,
you want to touch another place.
This longing is there in the human being
only as long as the life that you are remains in a seed form,
that is, it did not sprout and blossom.
This happened.
When Adiyogi was expounding the science of yoga
and talking about the nature of the cosmos,
how it’s related to your individual self
and what you can do with it,
then the seven sages who were with him,
they asked, “What is the nature of this cosmos?
How big is it?
Where does it begin, where does it end?”
So he laughed and said,
“Your entire cosmos, I can pack it into a mustard seed.”
Because your ideas of time and space are essentially because
you’re living within the framework of your intellect.
If you cross that dimension,
then there is no such thing as time and space.
Everything is here and now.
So, traveling through time, space –
no, it means nothing to me because...
It’s difficult to express,
difficult to articulate.
If I sound little
I have a reputation of being very logical
but if I sound illogical or silly to you,
you can blame it on my jetlag.
I’ve just come from United States after six weeks,
so you can say, “Maybe he was jetlagged,
that’s why Sadhguru’s saying something silly.”
But I’m fine.
I’m saying this because
you can't fit the universe into your silly little logic.
Today’s human being is too overly enamored with their own logic,
that they’re missing the entire life.
The gamut of phenomena that’s happening in the existence is missed
because the only way you can accept anything is
it has to fit into the square hole of your logic.
Anything that doesn’t fit into your logic, you will reject.
In this, you’ve rejected the entire cosmos.
In this, you’ve rejected the magic of life.
You have become a slave of logic
and completely missing the magic of life.
So, this time, space, all this stuff is because
intellectually you’re trying to dissect the universe
and try to understand this, this, this.
Tell me, if you sit here,
suppose you’re very joyful,
do you see,
you will not know how the day passed off?
And if you’re depressed, do you see the day won’t pass?
So time is a consequence of the miserable nature of human existence.
If you were truly blissed out and ecstatic,
you wouldn’t know what is a day,
what is a year,
what is a lifetime.
You wouldn’t know.
There’ve been times, I sat down, I didn’t realize, I thought it’s five minutes
but people gathered around and started molesting my feet (Laughter).
No, because they...
in their understanding I sat there for many days or whatever.
This idea of time and space is a very convoluted idea,
simply because people are stuck in the framework of their logic.
My work,
my fundamental work is to take people
beyond the framework of logic into the true magic of existence,
our own existence.
But it takes a lot of time.
Still my reputation is of being very logically correct
because I’m still trying to woo them, tch (Both laugh).
Still wooing them, you know (Laughs)?
For the real thing to happen,
they will take a long time unfortunately
because they have become such slaves of their logic.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is the first thing you notice when you meet a person?
Sadhguru: Just everything.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Everything?
Sadhguru: Everything. Past, present and future (Karan Johar laughs) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Is it more important to do what you love or love what you’re doing?
Sadhguru: One word or more (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): The choice is entirely yours.
Sadhguru: See, if you are an intelligent person, you will try to do what you love most.
But if you’re a genius, you will do just what is needed (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): If you could be invisible for a day, what would you do (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: You wouldn’t know (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): With due respect, what is your biggest weakness?
Sadhguru: Hmm? Biggest (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is your biggest weakness?
Sadhguru: See, what normally people treat as weakness in their lives...
Okay,
let me give a normal answer,
why...
why am I going into all this?
Already you said I’m... what? What is the word?
Sashayed (satiated?), hmm (Both laugh)?
My biggest weakness is I love danger.
Without danger, I cannot live.
I need to do something, which...
which keeps me on the edge of being mortal,
being alive and dead.
I want to walk that line all the time.
Every day I’m stepping on it one way or the other (Few applaud).
Is it a weakness?
I don’t think so, but people think.
“Sadhguru, you shouldn’t risk your life like this.”
But if there’s no risk, I’m feel...
I feel I’m not being...
Because most of the time in my life,
for whatever I’m doing,
I don’t feel tested.
It’s only in moments of danger that I feel little tested.
So my weakness is, I like to be stretched, you know?
For all the time when I was riding across India and later on I started driving,
my only wish was that...
to find a machine, which will test my skills.
Always found the damn things broke down if I took it to my limits.
These days recently, I’m beginning to get to do a few machines,
which are testing me, whether I can push it all the way or not (Both laugh).
Maybe that’s because of my age (Karan Johar laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No.
Sadhguru: If I had met them much younger,
I think I would have
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You would have managed to work around them (Sadhguru laughs).
One thing the world doesn’t know about you?
Sadhguru: They don’t know a thing about me (Laughter/Applause).
That’s a fact (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And the one thing you wish you could change about yourself?
Sadhguru: Oh, I never looked at that (Few laugh).
I could speak Hindi (Laughter/Applause).
No, I’m sorry, Marathi (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): The one thing you wish you could change about the world?
Sadhguru: Tch, oh, a lot of things.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): One.
Sadhguru: Human beings (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Desperately in need of (Sadhguru laughs).
Sir, what would you consider to be your greatest achievement?
Sadhguru: I don’t think there’s any
because I always fall woefully short of my own expectation of what I could do (Applause).
So, I never feel anything is an achievement (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Is there a song you love and can listen to all the time?
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs)! I somehow...
(Someone starts singing Tamil song Alai Alai) (Laughter)
No (Laughs).
Probably because this came to me at a certain time
when I was in my early teens maybe,
so this one song kind of comes back to me more often than anything else.
It’s not that I even seek it but somehow,
one way or the other, this song keeps coming back to me,
is
“How many times” (Referring to Blowing in the Wind by Bob Dylan) (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Okay, okay. I know you haven’t seen any of my films
but do you have a favorite film?
Sadhguru: Oh! I’ve seen many good movies.
At one time, I saw a lot of them.
I’ve not seen much of Indian cinema
but I saw a lot of, you know, English cinema.
But one movie that I thoroughly, thoroughly enjoyed at that time
because on that day the way things happened,
many life situations fell together and everything,
was Roman Holiday.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Oh (Applause)!
Well, I have to say that that’s the first film I’ve ever seen in my life,
my mother took me to the cinema (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: Here we are!
Interviewer (Karan Johar): It is true,
Roman Holiday is the first film I ever saw,
it was my introduction to the big screen (Sadhguru laughs).
I’m glad I have something in common with you (Laughter).
Sadhguru: That image of Audrey and Gregory Peck is... somehow just stayed with me (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Wonderful.
Sadhguru: It was probably my age (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, it must have been.
Something you enjoy doing and wish you had more time for?
Sadhguru: I wish I had more time because
I made myself like this,
that there is nothing that I enjoy or do not enjoy.
I make sure I enjoy everything that I do,
including simply sitting quietly, or talking to somebody,
or doing whatever. Because my activity is not limited to one area,
so many things.
If you did not enjoy everything that you do and do not do,
you will go insane trying to manage so many things.
But I’ll not go insane because I enjoy being alive.
Activity is...
Anything is okay.
Everything I do, I enjoy (Both laugh).
Small things, big things, every kind of thing.
Most profound things and silly things,
I enjoy thoroughly (Both laugh) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): As should us all.
Lastly, in a biopic made on you, who would play you (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: But who would make a biopic, first of all (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No,
there would be lots of interested people.
Sadhguru: Maybe you should animate (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I don’t think you would want that (Both laugh).
Well, that is the end of the rapid fire
and you totally deserve the hamper that doesn’t exist on this platform (Laughter).
But it’s a virtual hamper that I’ve given to you with my (Both laugh) love, gratitude
and deepest amount of respect.
Thank you (Both laugh) (Applause).
Sadhguru: Thank you.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I think before we open questions to the house,
it’s integral for me to share that
the last week that I spent reading about you and hearing everything that you had to say –
so many people question you, including Juhi (Referring to Juhi Chawla), who’s in the house –
it’s been exhilarating, it’s been enlightening and more than anything else,
I think it gave me a certain sense of understanding about where I am.
Being at a crossroad of my life emotionally
and also now as a newfound parent,
I read some of what you had to say about even parenting.
To me, it was extremely enlightening to read that...
that not to nurture the dos and don’ts so strongly on your child.
We all have theories of parenting
but I think just what I imbibe from what you had to say is
that if I am strong-willed
and I exude a certain amount of pleasantness
and I give out the right amount of energies,
my child and my children will emulate that, imbibe that
and I don’t have to constantly force-feed that knowledge on them,
they will imbibe it from my energy source in any case.
That is what I drew with, am I right?
Sadhguru: No (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Okay.
Sadhguru: See, one level right.
But it’s not question of energy and
Don’t… Don’t make simple aspects of life mystical
because my entire life is dedicated to make mystical very approachable.
But generally in the society,
people are trying to make simple aspects of life mystical.
Rearing a child is not a mystical dimension of life.
It’s
Millions of people have done it.
For thousands of generations, people have done it.
We are not reinventing anything here.
It’s just a simple biological process.
Every creature does it.
A bird is teaching its offspring to, you know, find a worm
and a worm is teaching its offspring to escape the bird.
All kinds of things are happening in their own way.
Similarly human beings are doing it,
but as we get more educated,
we become more fussy about it.
There was a time that a whole lot of parents had eight-ten children.
They did not even know their names.
Number one, number two, they called them (Laughter),
but they grew up somehow (Laughs).
They just provided the basic ecosystem and they just grew up.
So let’s not make it too whatever because
you can easily
because today is a time of just one child or two children
and we’ve become totally,
overly emotional about what is ours
and we lose perspective of what is the reality.
A child will grow up anyway.
If they’re nourished, they will grow up.
Now what should they grow up as?
Should they grow up confused,
should they grow up strong,
should they grow up stable,
should they become sage-like,
should they become something else?
That’s a question.
What they should become in the world is a social issue.
That will be decided in the times in which they grow up and the exposure that they have.
Now you become a filmmaker
not because you’re intrinsically a filmmaker.
Because you are in Mumbai,
you come from that kind of family and the atmosphere around you is like that,
naturally you choose that.
Suppose you were somewhere else,
let’s say 1000 years ago you were somewhere else,
would you be thinking of filmmaking?
No, you would be thinking of something else.
So what we do in our lives is just a circumstantial thing.
Let’s not read too much into it.
The question is,
when we have children, how complete and joyful and wonderful are they?
Because every life is aspiring not to do this or that,
every life is aspiring only to become a full-fledged life,
that’s all.
Whether it’s a worm, insect, or plant, or tree,
they’re only aspiring to become a full-fledged life.
There is no other aspiration in life, including ourselves.
Only problem with the human being is,
we know what is a full-fledged worm,
we know what is a full-fledged mango tree,
but we don’t know what is a full-fledged human being.
This is the only problem.
My work is just this,
to make people perceive,
not understand –
you must understand the difference or the distinction
between perceiving, experiencing and understanding –
not understand, but perceive and experience what it means to be a full-fledged life human being.
And that’s all that must happen to your children and every other children
every other child on the planet.
What should happen?
They must become full-fledged life, that’s all.
For this,
they need an ecosystem and nourishment,
not teaching from another time.
Because you belong to an another time, you are past.
You may not like it.
I am not saying as a director, you are past.
I am saying (Laughs), in terms of time, compared to your children, you are past, okay?
So one important thing that we need to do when we have children is,
no
to help them not to get overly identified with us.
This is to make an investment –
heavy investment
child means –
but not expect any return.
Tch, tch, tch,
this is difficult for a stock market world.
How to make an investment without return?
But this is what bringing up a child means.
You want to make a heavy investment, no return expected.
This is all.
If you want to
because I have...
You know, in raising my girl – I won’t go into the lengthy affair –
but I made sure nobody teaches her anything
nor did I teach her anything.
No one-two-three,
no A-B-C,
no “Mary had a little lamb”
because I don’t care whether Mary had a lamb or not (Laughter), you know.
People said, “Sadhguru, the way you are bringing up this girl,
she won’t know how many fingers she has.”
I said, “I don’t care whether she knows how many fingers she has
as long as she knows how to use her fingers” (Laughs) (Applause).
Why should she know this is ten?
She thinks this is hundred.
Actually this used to happen.
When she was just
because I just exposed her to nature.
As much as possible, I expose
If there is nothing else, at least I took her up on the terrace
and showed her the stars, which you can’t do in Mumbai.
You will show other kinds of stars in Mumbai (Laughter).
So, she would look up at the sky and say –
she would call be by name, first name and say –
“Jaggi, ten!”
Ten stars. Tch,
because in her mind, the biggest number is ten,
somewhere she heard ten (Both laugh).
So she didn’t say million,
she said ten.
I said, “Yes, ten.”
What is the problem? Whether ten stars or ten-billion stars,
what is your problem?
You think you are very knowledgeable because you know there are hundred-billion galaxies.
In what way does it matter
whether there are hundred-billion or there are none?
What way does it matter?
Because you are not seeing stars,
you are only seeing the reflection in your mind, isn’t it?
If you spend time to know the nature of what makes you experience all this
So, she asked me once something,
so I just told her just this,
“This is all you need to know about life.
Never look up to anybody.”
She looked at me like this (Gestures)
I said, “Not even me,
because the value of me will be completely lost the day you look up to me.”
You must look at me just as I am,
then you will see immense value for who I am.
If you look up to me, you will miss everything
and one day you want to hang me on your wall,
as you did to everybody else, to Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Shiva, everybody,
you hung them on your wall,
you will hang me also on your wall.
You will miss the entire value.
You missed all those guys, now you’ll miss me also.
You must look at me just the way I am.
Never look up to anybody,
never look down on anybody, this is all (Applause).
Once you do not look up to anything or look down on anything,
you will see everything just the way it is.
If you see everything just the way it is,
you will navigate your life
through life effortlessly.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): That’s true.
That is simple theory and easy enough to live by (Sadhguru laughs).
Thank you. Thank you Sadhguru.
With that, I think I would like to open the questions up to the house
and I am sure we have a volley of questions, which I can already see,
hands going up in the air.
I don’t even know where to start. Okay, yeah.
Questioner (Rishabh): I’ve worked hard for this, please.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Sorry?
Questioner (Rishabh): I’ve worked hard for this, please.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You’ve worked hard for this? Okay, then I suppose hard work should never go unfounded.
Participant: Hello?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Is there a mike that is circulating? (Pause)
Sadhguru: Okay, you can shout it.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, if you have worked hard,
you can scream loud (Sadhguru laughs).
Yeah, there you go.
Questioner (Rishabh): Namaste Sadhguru and hi Karan Johar.
I am thirty-one.
I have kept myself single all my life. so that I could accomplish
Sadhguru: No, no, you should go back there, it’s… it doesn’t come to me, the sound.
Questioner (Rishabh): Yeah.
My name is Rishabh, I am thirty-one.
I’ve kept myself single all my life, so I could accomplish (Sadhguru laughs) something big.
And you of all people should know how important and difficult it is.
Important because to accomplish something big,
if you’re single,
it helps without added responsibilities on your shoulders.
And difficult because
Sadhguru: I know you are trying to speak from your heart
but microphone works best here (Gestures) (Laughter).
Questioner (Rishabh): I just didn’t want to be too loud. Okay.
And difficult because, India,
they keep asking you why you are still single.
I would like to space dive
and I have talked to a million people about this
and I have knocked on a hundred doors,
to turned down every single time
including the doors of ISRO (Referring to the Indian Space Research Organization).
Sadhguru: I can’t hear a thing.
Questioner (Rishabh): Including the doors of ISRO
and they said they don’t have enough funds.
Sadhguru: It’s a very long question and we have not heard most of it.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I can’t hear a thing actually,
I am feeling incap
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is your question, Sir?
Questioner (Rishabh): Okay, so my question is I would like to space dive
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You would like to space?
Questioner (Rishabh): Space dive.
So it’s basically going all the way up to space
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You want to go to space?
Sadhguru: Okay.
Questioner (Rishabh): And diving from there.
Sadhguru: Okay.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And tie what in space?
Participants: Dive.
Questioner (Rishabh): It’s space dive.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Oh, space dive!
Questioner (Rishabh): Yes.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Oh, you want to space dive?
Questioner (Rishabh): Yes.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Okay.
Questioner (Rishabh): So the thing is I have knocked on a hundred doors
only to be turned down every single time
because even ISRO turned me down saying they don’t have enough funds.
Space dive is important because
India has gone leaps and bounds forward in space technology,
but in the human space psychology it’s way back.
My question to you Sadhguru is
My biggest weakness is I like to live in danger.
My question to you Sadhguru is,
where do I find an organization that will help me with the discipline,
yoga and meditation that’ll help me with this?
Participant: Isha Foundation.
Questioner (Rishabh): And where do I find a person,
most preferably a music… movie director,
they’ll fund this project,
understand the importance of it (Laughter/Applause)
Sadhguru: Hey, you
Questioner (Rishabh): …understand the importance of this project,
that India needs a human space program,
fund it and make a movie out of it,
which has less drama,
less songs and more of how a person struggles to get the mission accomplished.
Thank you very much.
Sadhguru: Okay, we got the question.
You took a long time to get to the question but
Interviewer (Karan Johar): He wants to space dive,
he wants me to make a movie, he want to ____ (Unclear).
Sadhguru: No, no, no, he wants money (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): He wants money.
My dearest thirty-one year old – that’s all I heard,
that you were thirty-one –
if I had money, the last thing I would do is give it to you to space dive (Laughter).
There’s many things that I would do with that money
and yours is not on my bucket list.
But would you like to answer his space diving?
Sadhguru: The day after tomorrow,
that’s on fifth – day after tomorrow is
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Is the sixth.
Sadhguru: I’m sorry, tomorrow… tomorrow evening
tomorrow evening I am at the ISRO at Sriharikota for the launch (Referring to the launch of India’s heaviest rocket GSLV-Mk III, along with a communications satellite GSAT-19).
Let me see if I can attach you to the rocket (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Thank you.
Yes.
Will you pass your mike on, Sir?
Sadhguru: No, no
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No.
Sadhguru: …the boy is very serious.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah he is very serious about this (Sadhguru laughs).
I don't know… Would you
Sadhguru: So about you being single (Laughter),
you are sa
you have saved one life (Applause).
And I want to tell you,
whether you space dive, or you don’t dive, or you nosedive (Laughter),
all of us are born single and we die single.
Tch, in between, what drama is... you do is up to you.
So you want to do a single act, or a double act, or a multiple act, it’s up to you (Few laugh).
But essentially, we are born single and we die single.
And if you want to space dive
This is comic book stuff.
It means nothing.
Do not waste your life.
You are a young man.
Don’t waste your life thinking,
“I want to space dive,
I want to do this and Karan is going to fund it.”
He made is very clear,
he has other ideas for his money and I am glad (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Well, you get married, that’s like space diving (Laughter/Applause).
It’s the same thing.
You don’t know where you are going, you are just diving (Laughter).
Yes (Laughter).
That’s true.
Questioner: Namaskaram.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Namaskaram.
Questioner: When I told my teenage daughter about this program,
her immediate reaction was an excited wow.
She is here with me and this program is everything we thought it would be.
Question for you, Karan –
what exactly inspired you to do this session with Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: Whoa!
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Thank you Ma’am.
Sadhguru: He did not say he is inspired (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I was,
and the lady definitely has it right.
It is because as I said somewhere that
there are many questions that I constantly seek answers for.
I find myself in a dilemma between my emotions,
between my fears,
my anxieties,
my tussle internally between my letting go of religion
and holding on to what I understand of spirituality.
I haven’t been able to seek too many answers through the books I have read
or the people I have heard.
To me, Sadhguru has been a revelation in more ways than one
because he made many of my answers
the answers that I was looking for resonate with my life.
And I think eventually, what we look for is deep resonance.
And anything that you attach yourself to, be (it?) a spiritual energy,
a god perhaps,
a religion,
you feel that you need to find answers within that resonance.
And I felt that my life resonated with everything that you said
and everything that you professed
and that’s why I was very interested and excited to be part of this platform (Applause).
Yes Sir, I’m sorry,
I was meant to go to you first.
Behind you, he’s… Sir,
I’ll come back to you Sir.
The mike
Questioner: Thank you.
Namaskaram Sadhguru,
hello Karan.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Hi.
Questioner: There are two questions.
If the first one is answered, I don’t need the second one’s answer.
This is a request –
can I please get a hug from you, Sadhguru (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: Hey, why don’t you try him (Referring to Karan Johar) (Laughter/Applause)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Why am I a second in that line (Laughter)?
Questioner: I didn’t name the person.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is your second question?
The first is you want a hug. Second is what?
You can’t
Don’t go into a kiss then because (Laughter) that might be detrimental.
Questioner: No,
just the presence of Sadhguru for the first time in my life,
I just don’t want to miss it.
I don't know when will I will get the chance next,
so if I could just (Laughter)
I know it’s a difficult one.
Sadhguru: No, no, nothing difficult about it.
It is just that I have been working with people to make them understand
People, especially outside the country
and now unfortunately it’s caught up here,
“Where is my hug, Sadhguru?
Can I get my hug?”
Tch, you are turning something beautiful into something very ugly.
When you are in a certain state of inclusiveness,
if it became necessary, you embrace somebody.
It’s a very beautiful act.
Now it’s a commodity, “Where is my hug?”
It’s something (Laughs) that you give and take.
It’s not a transaction.
This is what religion has done –
everybody hugs three times, or four times, or whatever number of times.
This is not what it is.
All the… the tenderness that a human being feels within himself or herself,
you’re destroying it and make it into some kind of act.
Okay, I will hug you,
I’ll hug every one of you,
what about it?
Sweat exchange (Laughter)?
So, this is something we need to do.
And people also
In India, this happens,
they grab my hand and,
“Sadhguru bless me” and they place it on their own head (Laughter).
My
Blessing will not come like this.
Blessing will come when you become receptive,
when you are in a certain way,
if it’s blessed, something wonderful can happen out of it.
Something tremendous can happen out of it.
You grab my hand and (Gestures) (Laughter),
what is that blessing?
And if you grab my hand or foot or you hug me forcefully,
this is called molestation (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): All right,
you got your jadu ki jhappi (Referring to Hindi phrase – magical hug)?
We had… Yes Sir, yeah.
Questioner (Sanjeev Kapoor): Hello. Namaskar Sadhguru.
I know a hug is not possible but you cook very good dosa.
Is that possible (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Certainly not here (Laughter).
Questioner (Sanjeev Kapoor): I know.
No, my question is that when we cook,
if we have to get joy (Applause) (Camera pans to him and people recognize celebrity chef Sanjeev Kapoor),
joy of cooking,
then that joy is something which is internal and I cook for my joy.
But when you are cooking for others, then you want to give them joy
and at times there is a conflict.
Who should win?
Sadhguru: This is for him (Referring to Karan Johar)?
Questioner (Sanjeev Kapoor): No Sir.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, no, it’s for you only (Laughter).
I have different things on my menu (Laughter).
Sadhguru: See, let us not make everything
This is the most fundamental thing about being spiritual
or spiritual process means just this.
You… Essentially, spiritual process means just this,
that you live here like only you exist,
nobody else but you.
Because you see everybody as yourself
and there is no issue.
People ask me,
“Sadhguru, wherever you go,
whether it’s 10000 people or 100000 people, how do you speak?”
“Ah, well I am talking to them like I’ve… if at I
if I had the habit – I don’t have –
if I had the habit of talking in front of my mirror,
how I would speak to myself,
that’s how I am speaking.”
There is no
You… You… What I am doing is not some kind of oratory or discourse.
I am just talking like I would talk to myself
because I don’t see anybody but myself.
So, spiritual process means just this,
that in some way you became all inclusive, in your experience you became all inclusive.
So, one thing that has disappeared from your life is comparison and competition.
Comparison starts and then it transforms itself into competition
and then it goes into ugly things.
So even for something as alive and as beautiful as joy
Joy is (Laughs)
Joy is the most important aspect of your life, you know.
That is, joy means your experience of you being...
your existence is fantastic.
Your experience of your existence has become beautiful,
that’s why you’re joyful.
Now, I am not joyful because I make –
I make the best dosas, not you, okay (Laughs) –
not because I make the best dosas,
nor will I be super joyful because I eat whatever the best things that you cook.
Before I come into your restaurant, I’ll be very joyful.
If you make something good, I will eat joyfully,
if you make something bad very joyfully I will push it aside.
But with your good cooking or bad cooking, you can’t steal my joy,
nor can you give my joy.
I want you also and everybody in the world become like this,
that somebody else cannot determine
what happens within you (Applause).
because
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes Ma’am.
Sadhguru: …you are
you are calling fundamental sense of slavery that you get into
with beautiful names.
This is dangerous.
So anyway, people are saying wonderful things about your cooking.
They have not said anything about you,
but they have said wonderful things about your cooking.
I would like to eat one day (Laughter/Applause).
I don’t know if I can afford it but (Laughter)
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes Ma’am.
We’ll get a mike for you Ma’am.
Questioner (Devika Patel): Namaste Sadhguruji, my name is Devika Patel
and I’d like to ask you a question because you’re a mystic
and even otherwise.
Please don’t say, “I don’t care”
because many people out here I’m sure do.
My question is, what do you think of reincarnation?
Do you believe in it and if so,
can you elaborate on the subject
and let us know what you were in your last birth?
Thank you.
Sadhguru: Now you’ve already put strictures on me (Few laugh)
as to what I should not say.
For me,
last three lifetimes have been same work,
around the same place
and a few people… handful of people, same people.
To such an extent
that sometimes by mistake I end up calling them by old names.
But you should not believe all this nonsense (Laughter/Applause).
No,
because the moment you believe it,
you will look at this person and little if they are friendly with you,
“Oh, maybe in my last life (Laughter),
my past life.”
It is very good you don’t remember a thing about anything
because in your present life,
you are not able to handle the emotional tangles
and psychological involvements with people,
if you remember ten lifetimes,
you would break your mind.
It takes an extraordinary sense of dispassion
to download many lifetimes of memory
and still not respond or react to those things
and simply see it for what it is.
In your present state, if such things happen,
it’ll be a disaster.
But anyway you should not believe these things
because you should not believe anything or anybody.
You should not disbelieve them either.
Now, in such a large crowd
I have a huge reputation of being very logically correct
and now you’re making me say such stupid things.
I’m staking my reputation.
You must understand that I wouldn’t make that mistake (Few laugh)
because I don’t gain anything by talking about this.
Because you insisted that I should not dismiss it
But essentially, what you’re asking is –
let me translate this question for you,
essentially what you’re asking is –
when you say,
“Is there a past life or is there a future life?”
what you’re asking is,
“Beyond this body, is there something more?”
This is all you’re asking,
“After my death or before my birth, was there something else?”
This is the question. Or you are asking,
“What is the nature of my existence?”
Well, that’s my full-time business,
to bring you to that experience as to what is the nature of your existence.
You must come.
You should not ask just a casual question here in Mumbai and disappear.
Now you made me say illogical things in front of all these people,
now you must invest some time to know what is the nature of your existence,
otherwise it’s entertainment question (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I don’t know, you have a color you like (Laughs)?
I don’t know who to ask?
Sadhguru: He is working hard but after him (Referring to a previous questioner) I am afraid of hard-working (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes, yes, yes,
hard-working in blue (Sadhguru laughs).
Participant: Can I have mike or can I speak like this?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, no, no we’ll get you a mike.
We have just two questions after this gentlemen.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, yeah, I am going to get there, right there.
Questioner (Aishwarya Nigam): Namaskaram Sadhguru, namaskaram Karan Sir.
Sadhguru: Please somebody give a mike to that lady
who is up there with her hand up, after this boy is over, yeah?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, yeah.
Questioner (Aishwarya Nigam): Pranam Sadhguru,
my name is Aishwarya Nigam
and I have been to the ashram many times
and I have read many of your books.
Sadhguru: You must quickly come to the question, everybody is waiting.
Questioner (Aishwarya Nigam): The question is, Sadhguru,
I’m stuck here I want you please guide me,
tell me in a child’s language what is the answer and what is the solution.
I don’t want to give importance to my own thoughts and emotions,
tell me how,
please make me understand (Few applaud).
I don’t know when will I get this mike again
although I’m always in your presence,
but I want the answer Sadhguru,
I don’t want to ____ (Unclear).
Sadhguru: When you get out of this hall, start walking south (Applause).
If it’s a genuine question,
if it’s a question which truly matters, you must seek.
I would have gone to the ends of the world,
if I found somebody, who could answer the billion questions I had.
If really it matters to you, the question, you must seek,
if you think going south is the answer.
If you don’t think so, you shouldn’t bother with me.
If you think so, you shouldn’t waste a moment of your life
because I want everybody to at least be straight and in
some basic integrity to your life.
You ask big questions
and you leave it and go sit in the matinee show.
Tch,
I’m not saying you should not go to the matinee,
I’m sorry (Laughter).
I’m saying the wrong things,
wrong examples (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): That’s fine,
no offense taken (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: So, I want you to understand
People… Somebody came and ask me recently,
“Sadhguru, are you a devotee of Shiva?”
I said “You fool,
did you ever see me sitting somewhere and doing Shiva pooja?
Did you see me?
My entire bloody life,
I have invested in you, all right?
There is nothing else I do,
except constantly seeing how to raise people to the next step.
And you are asking me, am I devoted to somebody.
I’m bloody devoted to you and you are not seeing it” (Laughs) (Applause).
So, when you ask this question,
I take the question seriously, I believe you’re genuine.
But then you go and get drunk today evening.
I am not against any of those things,
matinee or drink or this or that.
All I am saying is you must have some integrity to your life.
When you ask a big question,
you must make the investment, isn’t it, of time and energy?
You must invest life because to bloody answer this,
I’ve invested my entire life (Laughs).
Yes (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Sadhguru, you had pointed out, there was
Yes. To the lady right at the back.
Sadhguru: That lady, please (Laughs).
Questioner: I have a question.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): One moment Sir,
we’re just going to the lady and then we’ll get
Where, who is that person?
Questioner: Here, right.
Sadhguru: She still doesn’t have the microphone.
He is on, on it.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Okay, you’re on the mike, all right go ahead.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguruji. My question is,
what can be the greatest change one can bring to our life
to make it more blissful in this birth?
Sadhguru: You got to change.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You have to?
Sadhguru: You got to change, I said (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You got to change.
Sadhguru: There’s nothing else (Laughs).
You think by doing something else, this (Referring to oneself) will become blissful?
No.
This one (Referring to oneself) has to change to become blissful.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes, the lady, has she got the mike?
Yes, just reaching you Ma’am.
Questioner: Namaskar to one and all.
Sir, my question is,
I get very attached easily
and now I feel I’m very attached to my responsibilities.
So how do I break this bondage
and if I really want to do something for myself,
not for anybody,
just to feel the joy that I’ve been listening to you,
if I want to really, really feel that joy,
how do you I break the bondage of responsibilities
and move ahead
and how do I overcome my attachments?
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs). I want you to understand that
responsibility is never a bondage.
Responsibility means you chose to respond to something wholeheartedly,
so it is never a bondage.
And how is it opposing your joy, I don’t understand.
Because to what extent you have the ability to respond,
only to that extent you know life.
If you lose your ability to respond,
you become dead.
In fact, somebody is dead means they’ve lost all ability to respond, that’s all it is.
So, don’t ever think your responsibility is stopping you from being joyful.
If you had no responsibilities (Laughs),
many of you would be freaked to madness.
You are fortunate you got something to dabble with.
Nothing to do, I’ll keep you in a room,
nothing to do, I’ll feed you well,
you’ll go crazy.
You must be glad there are distractions for your madness.
So, you must understand this.
If… If your experience of life is such that
if you sit here, you start enjoying your existence –
not your thought,
not your emotion,
not your action,
your existence if you start enjoying –
you have a certain joy and blissfulness about your very existence,
then all this jargon doesn’t work.
If that one thing has not happened to you,
you are in a desperate condition,
you have to do a million things to know a little bit of pleasantness.
But tell me sincerely,
genuinely,
in a twenty-four hour segment,
how many moments of actual joy do you know?
Most people can count on their fingers,
many people have nothing to count.
They will say
“Oh, the day I got married, I was so happy.
The day I got my job, I was so happy.”
It happened, it’s history.
Because it is externally instigated,
otherwise by yourself you will become a wreck.
Please change this,
then all these jargons and philosophies are irrelevant to you
because you know the joy of your existence.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Thank you (Applause).
We have one last question. Yes Sir.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Hmm? Haa, haa,
I’m just going from this gentleman,
I’ll come to you.
Maybe two
Yes
Participant: Sadhguru
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I’ll leave that to Sadhguru,
after this how many more he’d like to answer (Laughs), but yes.
Questioner (Mohit Saldana): Sadhguruji Namaskaram. Karanji namaskaram.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Namaskaram.
Questioner (Mohit Saldana): I’m Mohit Saldana,
I’ve come from Karnal just to see you live and I’m feeling blissfully blessed.
I didn’t come with the question but now I have a question.
Sadhguruji, you just made a mention that world does not know anything about you.
And that remains a fact.
Even then, any so body world who comes in little contact with you gets so much benefitted.
So when would you reveal?
Or my question is, what does it take to become a Arjuna for the yogi of highest order of our times,
our Krishna, the you to reveal (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sorry if that question is still invalid.
Sadhguru: This is
This is difficult to articulate without sounding all wrong because
See, everybody is working
or everybody is trying to live their life
with different frames that they have created for themselves.
You can call this mindsets,
you can call this framework,
you can call this family,
you can call this society, you can call this ethics, morals, ideologies, whatever.
These are all frameworks you created.
But you understand,
a frame means you are putting a self-imposed limitation upon yourself.
I can understand,
he being a director-producer,
he’s thinking of frames,
because he’s thinking of capturing something for doing something else.
I’m asking you a simple question,
do you want to capture this life (Referring to oneself)
or do you want to experience this life?
Hello?
Participants: Experience.
Sadhguru: You want to experience this life (Referring to oneself).
You’re here to experience this life (Referring to oneself) and no other reason.
Everything else is secondary.
When I say life,
when I use the word life,
most of you will think
“Oh, my work, family,
my home, my car, my dog.” That’s not life,
these are all accessories to life.
You added all these accessories, believing that
with these accessories, your life will get enhanced.
But your money, your wealth, your family, your relationships,
these are all just accessories, isn’t it?
The real thing is here (Referring to oneself),
never experienced.
So, to first make somebody
I’m… You know, there’re many wonderful people around me.
This is the biggest wealth I have.
I have some truly, absolutely fabulous people around me all the time.
They won’t let me pass through a single day
without tears of joy, love, ecstasy.
Without witnessing this, a single day won’t pass for me,
no matter which part of the world I am in.
I don’t think there’s better wealth in the world,
in the physical world, in the human societies, than that,
that constantly you’re surrounded by people,
who are shedding tears of love and ecstasy.
Having said that,
their experience might have become beautiful by being in a certain presence,
by realizing a few things,
but still… they still have frameworks
because very few individuals have the sense of
a total sense of abandon to be here without framework.
As long as you’re with the framework,
we can add one drop here,
one drop there.
One more drop means it’ll break.
So in my life,
if (Laughs)
by the time I fall dead,
if I can share
maybe one or two percentages of what I have known,
I think I’m very fortunate.
Because I’m still looking,
I’ve not given up on it,
there can always be one or two individuals who’ll come up.
We have been working on them,
preparing them,
so that somebody can exist here without any sense of frames,
without any sense of what will be lost.
There are many people around me,
who, you know,
in every action that they do –
they’re not saying it verbally –
in every action that they do,
they show that they’re willing to die for me,
I keep reminding them in a thousand ways,
dying for me is not the answer.
That you are willing to allow this life (Referring to oneself) to happen in full flow,
this is where the answer is.
Because only if you’re a full-fledged life,
can I share what’s happening within me.
Otherwise, I’m talking about extending your frames,
giving you a different frame which is more difficult to manipulate (Laughs).
But totally undoing the frames will need this,
that you are a full-fledged life.
When I say a full-fledged life,
right now you have invested too much in your thought,
too much in your emotion,
you look up to something,
you look down on something,
you like something,
you dislike something.
In this state, it cannot be done.
I am working on people,
o lots of them,
and I’m also scanning the world
because there could be s...
anybody somewhere.
Because that will be a blessing,
not to me, but to the world.
If… If there can be human beings, not one,
if there can be a thousand human beings on this planet,
or if can be 10000 human beings,
or a million human beings,
who are just life,
no bull,
just life,
because this is the only thing that you’re aspiring for.
You may think you want money,
you may think you want pleasure,
you may think you want something –
no.
You are only wanting to… having a larger slice of life somehow, isn’t it?
That’s all there is.
Because that is all there is.
You think money will get that,
education will get that,
love will get that,
pleasure will get that,
but essentially you want a larger slice of life.
So if you want in slices,
we will cut it and serve it
because we have to keep you going,
otherwise you’ll run away (Laughs).
But I want to see you,
a day when I can throw life at you just like that,
without making slices out of it.
That would be a great day.
Make it happen (Applause).
Because I want to change
I want to change the perception of what is street.
If you say street,
if you use the word street,
people will think booze,
people will think drugs,
people will think prostitution,
all the ugly things.
If we do the right things,
in the next twenty, twenty-five years,
we can change this,
that street means beauty,
street means love,
street means meditativeness,
street means spiritual process,
street means the highest things.
We can do this, if we are willing.
We have the tools,
we have the means.
Why I’m saying this is, never before
Many great beings have come,
but nobody had the means that we have today.
A Krishna came,
a gentle being –
when he spoke, only one man heard.
Yes?
And another man overheard (Few laugh).
When Adiyogi Shiva came,
only seven people heard.
Today we have the ability,
we can sit here and speak to every human being on the planet.
Never before this was possible.
Now we have such an ability to communicate,
if we do not communicate the right things,
we are committing a crime against humanity.
So when we have this kind of power to communicate,
whatever is the highest dimension of life should become street.
I
My essential work is this,
to bring down spirituality from mountaintops to street (Applause).
That’s why my language is little street (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Not at all. With that,
I’m sorry we won’t be able to take any more questions,
we’ve reached the end of this Conversation with the Mystic
and thank you Sadhguru.
Thank you for your words, your wisdom (Applause)
and everything that you always bring (Sadhguru laughs) to the energy table of our universe.
Thank you so much, it’s truly been an honor.
Thank you.
And thank you to all of you for being a wonderful audience.
Thank you (Applause).
Questioner): : Sir, my question is,
as today,
we are talking about unity on one hand
and on the other,
we have reservation in terms of
admissions in colleges and job opportunities.
So isn't it that
it is bringing diversity in our thoughts?
Because unity of the mind is the greatest necessity of the time
and this is bringing in… bringing the diversity in our thoughts.
So, how can we
what measures can we have to remove it?
Sadhguru: This whole reservation policy
when it was envisioned,
it was to be for a short period of time
to correct a certain ill
which had taken place
a certain injustice which had happened
for thousands of years
a certain injustice which had occurred for thousands of years.
To fix that,
we thought for a certain period of time,
we will give a certain segment of people an extra advantage
so that they can come, level with the rest of the society,
but unfortunately
we have not been able to fulfill this vision.
Even today
even today
in villages across the country,
if you belong to a certain caste or creed,
you cannot even enter a tea shop and have a tea;
you’re not supposed to walk through certain streets,
everything is separate.
It’s a segregated society even today.
If we do not change this
and change this very soon
and the only way to change it is
to educate and skill India.
If we do not skill India, you will kill it.
So, this has to happen at the earliest possible time
because any kind of reservation
if it lasts for too long,
it will become a discriminatory process
which is what you are talking about.
So this onerous responsibility is there,
that the discriminatory process
that is being
even today practiced in the villages of India has to go.
Youth have a role to play.
We have done many things in this direction
but still it has not been solved.
It is a huge problem.
When such a big problem is there,
taking away that little advantage they have.
It needs to be reviewed every few years
whether it is necessary in a certain area or not,
but such right-thinking policies are not possible.
These things are all happening on electoral basis
whether we will win the election with this policy or not
that has been the only goal.
So, it is very important that it is addressed properly.
This is one thing that you can do
whichever constituency you belong to.
The legislative members or the parliament members that you elect,
the youth should participate in this
and call for a debate with the people who want to stay
stand for election that,
see, this is the statistic in our constituency.
Do we need this or not this?
Can we change it or not?
A policy has to come on the national level that it is selective,
not across the nation.
In urban areas, definitely it may not be necessary,
but in many rural areas, it is necessary
because they have been disadvantaged for thousands of years.
Sadhguru: Who wants to understand? (Few Laugh)
What do you want to understand?
Questioner: What I am along with my body, I want to experience it.
Sadhguru: Oh now you are changing the track,
you are like which party are you?
No
you are changing your position too often that’s why I am asking.
See initially you said you want to understand;
now you say you want to experience.
Questioner: I want to understand to experience it. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: You want to understand to experience it.
If you experience it you will have no need to understand it, isn’t it?
If you eat something,
you experience that,
do you understand that?
Questioner: No.
Sadhguru: You don’t care, you experienced it,
only if you want to manufacture this
you eat a rasagulla, you experience it, it’s nice.
Now you want to start a rasagulla factory,
now you want to understand everything about rasagulla.
If you want to just enjoy the rasagulla
you don’t have to understand anything,
you just have to have a sensitive tongue,
yes?
If you take rasagulla and keep it in your hand,
‘I want to understand this, I want to understand this…’ (Few Laugh)
hand cannot taste rasagulla. (Few Laugh)
If you put it upon your tongue only you experience rasagulla.
So, these are two different aspects,
experience will transform your life,
understanding comes in only if you want to transform others’ lives.
So understanding later,
right now you want to experience,
there are methods and methods and methods to do this.
How? You are asking,
let’s not go into how,
how badly do you want it, that’s the question
because what you are asking is;
I want to transcend the dimension
the present dimension of my existence.
No transcendence will happen unless
nobody will cross any dimensional limitations
unless you’re truly, truly, longing for it.
Yes?
You won't even pass a tenth standard examination
if there is a reasonable amount of longing, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
You won't transcend from school to college
if you do not have a certain level of longing.
From college to your masters you will not transcend
unless you have a little bigger longing,
from masters to a PhD
you will not transcend unless you have a much bigger longing, isn’t it?
So to transcend from one dimension to another
you need a certain level of longing.
So I am asking you how badly do you want it.
See this is the problem with me,
I am not simply saying,
‘Don’t worry, you just say Ram, Ram twenty five times a day (Laughter) it will happen,’
this is the problem with me
because I am not here to solace you
and let you sleep tonight,
I am here to awaken you in such a way that you can't sleep. (Laughter)
You can't go to sleep till you
‘till I know this I can't sleep’
if you become like that you will know today.
If you can ask this question and go home,
eat well and sleep,
we don’t know when it will happen.
Not because it’s far away,
not because it’s difficult
because there is not enough longing,
not enough fire in the belly,
so you don’t move.
This is so with everything in life.
(Sadhguru): Poornima means a full moon day.
Every full moon day that happens
twelve or thirteen full moons that come in a year
each one of them have a different quality about them.
Most people today, living in cities,
they don’t know which phase of the moon it is right now,
they’ve completely forgotten.
Today is a new moon day, don’t look up,
there’s no moon today (Laughter)
because today is a new moon day or
in America they call it no moon day, very literal (Laughs).
Which phase of the moon it is,
most people do not know today
because blazing lights, noises and this and that,
nobody pays attention either to the sky or to their own body.
If you pay… If you look up into the sky,
for sure you can know
or if you close your eyes and look at your system, you can know
what phase of the moon it is because
with every phase of the moon, the human system
accordingly behaves mildly differently.
This much you know,
that on a full moon day and a new moon day,
if you were a sailor,
you would for sure know what’s happening around you
because the very oceans are rising on this day.
It’s a huge body of water,
it’s rising.
If you look at
this planet as a body
this water body that we call as ocean
is covering over seventy percent of the land or the area.
Similarly, if you look at this body (Gestures),
even here,
over seventy percent is water
not by accident, that’s the design (Laughs).
So if the very oceans are rising
you think the water in your body is not rising?
The water in the ocean is laden with salt.
Salt does not mean just the salt that we use,
variety of things which we experience as salt.
But the waters here (Referring to oneself) have a more complex mixture,
this is a more complex soup than the oceanic soup.
Whether you made a great soup out of yourself or a lousy soup,
that depends,
but still it’s a very complex soup.
There (Referring to the oceans) – just salt water rises.
Out of this, ships will go, many things are launched,
various things happening,
the life changes in the ocean quite dramatically on this day
and on the full moon day.
The same is happening here (Referring to oneself)
but not being sailors
Sailor means somebody who wants to go somewhere, you know.
Sailor means somebody who is always longing to go to a new place.
So, if you are a spiritual seeker you’re like a sailor,
always want to go to a new place,
not because this place is bad
but we want to go to a new place within us.
We understand
We are mature enough to know
if I move from this place to another place geographically
it’s not really going to change my life.
So, we understood
we have to go to a new place within ourselves.
So, in a certain way you’re a sailor.
If you’re a sailor, the full moon day and the new moon day are very significant for you.
You’re waiting for that to happen.
That’s the day you would like to launch your new ship (Laughs).
So, pournami means it is a day when you can launch things within you.
So, there is a whole system of yoga which is calibrated
for the lunar cycles and the solar cycles
so that one can make use of this system,
one can make use of nature’s help.
As I said, among these twelve - thirteen… twelve to thirteen full moons that happen,
they are of different quality.
So, accordingly they have been identified,
I think in… in China there’s some significance
no, probably in Japan probably. August moon
you have some significance to August moon, hmm?
Chinese participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: There is?
Whatever the significance, I do not know,
but essentially the full moon that comes immediately after the summer solstice and the winter solstice
are of a certain significance.
This time Guru Poornima is the second full moon not the first one
because of some astronomical calculations it’s been moved to the second full moon
otherwise it’s always the first full moon after the solstice.
The first full moon after the winter solstice is called Dhanya Pournami
which is considered a day of fulfillment
and in Tamil Nadu it is celebrated as Thaipoosam –is it?
No,
it comes little after that? Okay.
It’s called Dhanya Pournami and it is celebrated in different ways
but essentially it means the day of fulfillment.
So, this Guru Poornima
this Poornima or this full moon after the summer solstice,
historically and also in terms of celestial arrangement of things,
it’s significant because
Adhiyogi
chose
to become a Adiguru.
The first yogi decided to become the first guru
over fifteen thousand years ago on this day
which is called as Guru Poornima.
It is the birth of the first guru
and this is the day he delivered
or he started transmitting the most significant message to humanity
which was never before.
That is,
he… he made them realize that if you’re willing to strive,
all the limitations that nature has set upon you,
you can cross.
You can evolve beyond your present limitations
if only you’re willing to strive and do the needed things within you.
Till then and even today, largely, most people
believe that “This is the way I’m made.
This is either god’s will or my father’s mistake (Laughs)
but this is the way I am,
I can’t do anything about it.”
On this day, Adiyogi introduced this possibility to humanity
and said,
“If you are willing to strive,
I will give you a science through which you can go beyond all limitations
that are considered human limitations.”
Even today, when people use the word human
most of the time
when people use the word human
they’re not talking about the immensity of being human,
the power of being a human,
the possibility of being human.
They’re talking about the limitations of being human.
When somebody says “Oh! I’m only human,”
they’re talking about how I’m limited.
Very rarely somebody is referring to “I am human”
as a great possibility
because still most of the people believe
that either because of god’s will or my parent’s mistake
I’m like this and this is all I can do.
If you experience a rebirth,
if you make a rebirth possible for yourself,
naturally your most important work will be
to ensure that the entire world knows that
if they are willing to strive
they can cross all the limitations created by themselves,
created by their genetics,
created… even imposed by the nature
even those limitations you can cross.
The limitations of life and death one can cross
if one is willing to strive for it.
So on this day which is called as the Guru Poornima,
this message was delivered.
So it’s very, very significant because
this made human life into a possibility,
a limitless possibility rather than being some kind of a trap
of being one more kind of creature on the planet.
So, we must celebrate this.
Barkha Dutt: The business of introducing Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev,
who’s been described in many different ways in my profession,
by people from my profession,
we’ve called you a maverick, (Sadhguru laughs)
we’ve called you a monk on a motorcycle,
we’ve called you a glamorous, flamboyant guru
but for your devotees you are simply Sadhguru.
And yet Sadhguru,
at a time when faith seems to be in collision with so many other questions
that come up as a matter of individual liberty,
I think this will make for a very interesting and important conversation for our times,
so I would like to thank you for
being part of this conversation.
Let me start with the spiritual
and I hope what you say today is also addressed to the skeptics.
I count myself among a skeptic,
who if told that another human being possesses some sort of godly power,
I would perhaps as the first instinct, not believe it
but I find interesting about what you’ve
some of your sayings, as captured by Arundhati Subramaniam in this book,
is that you’re actually saying that
what we experience beyond our five senses,
anything that we experience beyond the five senses can be called God,
can be called power
or can be called yourself.
So if God doesn’t necessarily exist,
why do we need gurus,
why do we need Sadhguru (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: Do you drive in Delhi?
Barkha Dutt: Do I drive?
Sadhguru: Mhmm. (Indicating agreement)
Barkha Dutt: Unlike you (Sadhguru laughs)
I have a fear of wheels (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: So if you drive in an unknown terrain
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: …you use these days a GPS.
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: Usually, a strange woman will tell you,
“Turn right,” you turn right.
She says, “Turn left,” (Laughter) you turn left.
She says, “Make a U-turn,” you make a U-turn (Laughter).
Why?
Simply because you are
you’re not familiar with the terrain.
When you are in an unfamiliar terrain,
it is sensible to take instructions. (Laughter/Applause)
Barkha Dutt: So are you
Are you saying gurus are the new GPS (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: Not new,
not new,
long time ago we’ve been. (Laughter/Applause)
For a very long time, way before the GPS came (Applause).
GPS means what – Guru Positioning System. (Laughter/Applause)
Barkha Dutt: But you know, have to say that while I don’t drive,
I’ve often sat in the car and heard that girl’s voice
on Google Maps and often Google Maps
Sadhguru: You can actually, you can actually
Barkha Dutt: …does not… does not adv… does not give you the right advice.
Sadhguru: You can change it to a man’s voice if you wish.
Barkha Dutt: Okay (Laughter/Applause).
This beginning of this conversation perhaps underlines
that you are atypical.
You are atypical of what we imagine gurus to be.
We expect people who don’t crack jokes,
we expect people who don’t have a zest for life.
Somehow, all of our spirituality has traditionally been centered around giving up,
around abstinence of some kind,
around abstaining from pleasures,
from denying creature comforts.
Why do you believe that the material can co-exist with the spiritual?
Sadhguru: It’s… It’s not that I believe,
it’s only because you have a body which is your physicality,
you have a life within.
If you did not have a body,
if you’re disembodied, I’m not going to talk to you (Laughs)
because with disembodied beings you don’t have conversations, okay?
I know people
Barkha Dutt: People do talk to ghosts.
Sadhguru: People are trying to do that these days (Both laugh).
Because they’re not on talking terms with the living (Laughter/Applause),
they choose the dead (Laughter)
because you can make the dead speak whatever you want.
The living will speak what they want,
it’s a big problem (Laughter).
It’s a very serious problem in a conversation
because I will say what I want to say
if I was dead, you can make me say whatever you want to say.
Barkha Dutt: But can an
Sadhguru: Because you can do both sides of the conversation.
Barkha Dutt: But if your philosophy
you hate the word philosophy I know
if your technology of Inner Engineering
and we’ll talk more about that in just a moment
is available to all of us to, in a sense find strength within ourselves, Sadhguru,
then does that mean that the atheist and the agnostic and the skeptic
can also embrace spirituality?
Is Inner Engineering only for those who believe
or is it for anyone (Sadhguru laughs) who asks questions?
Sadhguru: The previous question is a loaded one, still not answered fully.
Barkha Dutt: Yes, I know (Sadhguru laughs), I haven’t… I haven’t given up on it yet (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: Coming to this,
see you’re putting atheists and agnostics and skeptics together
it’s a wrong classification.
Atheists and theists are together,
they’re one kind.
Barkha Dutt: Because they both have certainty.
Sadhguru: Both… Both believe something that they do not know.
Both are not sincere enough to admit that they do not know.
This is the biggest problem.
The biggest problem in the world is
people are still not straight enough to come to a place,
“what I know I know, what I do not know I do not know”
because they have not realized the immensity of “I do not know.”
“I do not know” is the basis of longing to know
and seeking to know and the possibility of knowing.
The moment you destroy “I do not know,”
you destroyed all possibilities of knowing.
So this is atheism and this is theism,
they’re not different,
they’re in the same boat, they pretend to be different.
One believes positively,
another believes negatively
but they both believe something that they do not know.
One person, a well-known person in the country
who goes about claiming he’s an atheist all the time,
one day comes up to me, somebody just introduces me first time,
I say 'namaste'
He says, “You know, I believe there is no God?”
I said, “I don’t even believe that” (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: Do you mean Javed Akhtar (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: I… I’m not
Barkha Dutt: That was a good imitation, so I guessed (Laughter),
it wasn’t difficult.
Sadhguru: I am not (Laughs) taking names,
I am saying the thing is you also believe something,
you don’t seem to understand that.
The most important thing is to come to this place of being utterly
straight and sincere with life
what I know I know, what I do not know I do not know.
If you come to this much, if you closely pay attention to everything around you,
you will see with all this scientific exploration,
we do not know even a single atom in its entirety,
that’s the fact.
Barkha Dutt: So what is it that you know Sadhguru (Sadhguru laughs)?
Why are millions of people your devotees because you just said that honesty…?
Sadhguru: They usually don’t
Barkha Dutt: …is about admitting
Sadhguru: They… They don’t claim that they are my devotees, you know.
Barkha Dutt: What do they say then?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Barkha Dutt: What do they say then?
Sadhguru: Usually they claim they’re meditators, volunteers, and stuff (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, volunteers then (Sadhguru laughs).
But there must be something they think that you know
because you just said that life is actually about admitting what you don’t know.
The corollary to that is there are things that you do know.
We do know we’re sitting at the Habitat Center Amphitheatre at this moment in Delhi
that we know.
What beyond this Sadhguru, do you know and what do you not know (Laughter)?
I’ve asked you like is there a question of
Sadhguru: Now, what do I know?
I don’t know anything except this one (Referring to oneself).
I know this piece of life from its origin to its ultimate.
Everything that I need to know about this life, I know.
And I see every other life is actually the same thing,
if you look deep enough.
So in that context,
because today modern science is coming to this,
there is a… a theory which is evolving,
which is called as constructional theory
what they are beginning to say is
whether it’s an amoeba or a grasshopper or a earthworm or a bird
or an animal or an elephant or you or me or the whole cosmos,
the fundamental design is same.
It is only a question of complexities and sophistication of the same design.
So this is something always the yogic science has been saying,
that if you know
you know anda you know pindanda, (Laughs) you know?
If you know the atomic, you know the cosmic
because the fundamental design is same,
it’s only a question of complexity and sophistication of what’s happening.
So fundamentally, if you know this piece of life (Referring to oneself)
you know everything by inference.
Barkha Dutt: But when you say this piece of life,
do you mean yourself,
do you mean this moment,
what do you mean by this piece of life?
Sadhguru: You are a piece of life, aren’t you?
Are you life or are you… are you media (Laughter)?
Barkha Dutt: Are they mutually exclusive?
Sadhguru: No, no, because people (Sounds like: are/have?) mediums,
that’s why I’m saying (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: I would hope I’m a flesh and blood person
unless somebody knows better (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Flesh and blood you gathered, isn’t it?
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: What you call as my flesh and blood,
you slowly gathered over a period of time.
If this much accumulation of flesh and blood,
this much impressions have to be gathered,
there must be something more fundamental, isn’t it?
(Questioner): I feel that I’m full of fear, anger, jealous – all those things.
How to go beyond all these things and to know this life to its fullest?
(Sadhguru): You don’t have to go beyond all these things;
you just have to stop creating those things.
Your fear, your anger –
all these are products of a mind
which you have not taken charge of.
Your mind is capable of producing joy,
your mind is capable of producing fear,
your mind is capable of producing
anxiety, turmoil, tranquility, agony, ecstasy
it can produce anything.
It is producing things that you do not want,
simply because you do not know how to handle it.
There is no need for anybody
to handle their fear, their anger, their whatever;
nor is there any need for anybody
to seek happiness or peace or joy or blissfulness,
there is no need.
All you have to do is
you have to spend some time,
you have to do certain sadhana
to find out
where the keyboard is
for this fantastic computer that is loaded on your head.
You don’t know where the keyboard is,
so you’re punching all the wrong numbers,
so all kinds of things are happening.
So, either you can make this mind into a miracle,
or you can make this mind into a misery-manufacturing machine.
So the misery in the form of anger, fear,
you don’t have to do anything about it;
you just have to stop the production line,
you know, not the product.
You just have to stop the production line
and start a different product.
You must see the joy is coming out of it,
bliss is coming out of it,
because the same mind is capable of that also.
Sometimes, you’re joyful?
Sometimes?
A young man like this?
So it is capable of joy also,
so you just have to
J is always here.
You know the computer?
That’s where it is.
If you do like this, like this, like this
misery, misery, misery.
And if you hold one button –
misery misery misery misery misery – it’ll multiply.
(Laughter)
You should know how to keep your hands off the keyboard
and just punch what you want.
Now unawares you don’t even know where it is,
it’s punching; if you can't think properly
That’s not where it is,
wrong buttons. (Laughs)
So.....
(Speaks in Tamil) Isn't it so?
It doesn't work like that (Laughter)
If the brain works if you do like this, it would have been done like this.
So
there is sadhana to take charge of your body,
to take charge of your mind,
to take charge of your energies,
to take charge of everything that you are,
rather than taking charge of it
you are wishing for a nice product.
It will not happen like that.
Life has never worked like that,
not for anybody.
Never ever has anything worked for anybody
by doing all the wrong things.
Unless you do the right things,
right things do not happen to you at all.
Questioner: my question is
should culture be preserved at all
because in the name of preservation of culture
already we have started seeing moral policing in India.
Sadhguru: See, culture is a happening thing.
Nobody can preserve it as it is.
It is evolving all the time.
Nothing wrong with that;
if it's evolving naturally,
people making choices and making certain changes with their lives,
it's perfectly okay
but when your culture is being engineered by commercial forces
some amount of stopping and preserving also needs to happen, isn't it?
If naturally it's evolving,
people are making their choices
to eat differently,
to dress differently,
to do things different it’s perfectly okay
So for commercial forces are anyway having budget to change your culture;
having a strategy to change your culture.
When it is so
I think you should also have a strategy not to allow that to happen.
How it is done, is a questionable thing.
Whatever you called as moral policing -
it happened in crude ways;
so yes,
everybody is disgusted with that
but in some form of education,
some way it must be done.
It's very easy to sell sleaze, you understand.
And very easily you can catch the youth
and make that the culture of the land in no time.
Whatever… see I want you to understand this.
When you say culture,
there’re different types of cultures in the world.
If culture is just a social norm,
if culture is just a certain way people are living
because of climatic conditions,
because of other influences, that’s different.
I want you to under…understand
this culture was engineered
to gradually lead people towards their spiritual process,
always,
right from ancient times,
every aspect of your life
how to sit, how to stand -
everything was engineered
to slowly lead you towards a spiritual process
and I think
that part of the culture has to be preserved.
I don’t care how you dress, what you do
but there are many aspects of culture
which are essentially a yogic science implanted into people’s lives
so that without even knowing you are practicing yoga,
you are practicing yoga.
This was done thousands of years ago.
Like a mother teaches a child to brush his teeth
like that yoga should happen in their homes.
Brushing your teeth is a certain culture, isn't it?
There are some people who don’t have such things.
So this was brought into your life
because of the benefits that it has.
Similarly various other practices and norms were brought into your life
because of the benefits that it has for human well-being.
Now some commercial force is coming and removing everything
for their benefit;
if you don’t stop it in some way
they will take away everything.
So some amount of control is definitely needed.
If people are making their choices
and slowly evolving into something else
that is nobody’s business.
Okay?
That is nobody’s business.
Every human being has a right to choose and change his life the way he wants
but right now I want you to understand
most human beings are not choosing;
they are being forced to make choices, isn't it?
The commercial establishments,
the marketing departments are larger than the production departments
in most companies
and they are just campaigning;
If you don’t do some kind of stoppage,
it must be done gently,
sensibly
but unfortunately because
saner voices in the society never speak;
the crude ones get on to the street and do the job.
That's all that’s happening
because saner voices never speak.
If saner voices speak
there’ll be no room for all those street goons to take up these jobs.
It need not be policed
but education is needed, definitely, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Education is definitely needed,
what is the significance of doing
what we have been doing for these thousands of years -
this education is definitely needed.
Because the education is missing
somebody is trying to educate you on the street with a stick in their hand.
So because you and me have not taken the responsibility
of educating people properly
somebody is trying to do it in their own way;
it's unfortunate but that’s how it will happen.
That is how it will happen
if we don’t do it the right way.
(Questioner): You have talked about kriya yoga being a path for the tough people.
Are there any women kriya yogis on the path?
(Sadhguru): Women
(Questioner): Women kriya yogis on the path?
(Sadhguru): There have been but very few,
because kriya yoga
demands a certain
extreme sense of discipline
and perseverance at certain stages of its sadhana.
Generally,
it is not that it's not possible, but generally
women didn't choose kriya yoga
because they don't like that kind of hardship.
It is not necessary that kriya yoga should mean hardship,
no.
But biologically
a woman is slightly disadvantaged when it comes to kriya yoga,
not essentially so
but to a certain extent she is disadvantaged.
But what I have seen and known is
the general kriya that was taught
was mostly designed for a male
because most of the practitioners were male. .
So generally only men walked the path of kriya yoga
because it involved a certain discipline
and it involved a certain "taking away"
from the normal situations of life,
which was not possible at all in this culture for a woman.
Because by the time she was eight or nine she was married,
by the time she was fifteen she had a child.
So the question of she going into such atmospheres
which kriya yoga demands was not available.
So traditionally it got established like
kriya yoga means it's for men only,
not because yoga is of that nature,
because social conditions were of that nature.
So all the practices that were designed and structured
by various masters were all male oriented
because their disciples were male.
Accordingly they structured the processes.
This does not mean no woman has walked kriya yoga path,
I know many have,
but they were a very small minority,
so not too many practices were designed for them.
But the systems that we have structured here are suitable for women also.
They are doing well with their practices.
So can a woman walk kriya yoga?
Yes she can,
but if she wants to walk kriya as a hundred percent path,
she's slightly disadvantaged,
she's come with a handicap,
so she needs little extra effort if she's willing to do that.
But
it's always best if one wants to progress
to mix all aspects of life to
create a proper combination of these four dimensions
of gnana, kriya, karma and bhakti.
And in a woman generally
the emotional dimension in her is more dominant than other dimensions,
it's good to make use of that.
Why give up an advantage and
take up a handicapped position?
It's better to make use of the advantages that she has.

(Sadhguru): Unfortunately this has been the way of the humanity
when they feel helpless they bow down,
when they’re little
feel little powerful they step on your head.
There is nothing new about it in this world.
So devotion means just that,
to change that
that you do not choose
whether situations or people
to… as to how you are,
you are the way you are
that your way of being is not any more determined by
who is standing in front of you.
That’s the idea of devotion.
Everything else,
whatever other values you know,
other ways of behavior you know with people
always is determined by
who is standing in front you right now
and what kind of situation are you in right now.
Devotion means just that
somebody is there,
nobody is there,
whoever is there,
whatever the situation
you are still the same person.
This is the best way to establish your way of being.
Right now that’s the whole problem.
You are still too much of a flux.
When you are so much of a flux
how to take you anywhere?
You will naturally spill out somewhere, isn't it?
That’s exactly what's been happening with your life,
not just one person,
I am saying with everyone;
you try to go somewhere then you find half of you is there.
So you have to go back to recollect that and most probably
you won't come back anyway.
So devotion means just that
that your way of being is no more determined by anything or anybody.
The situations in which you exist and
whom you are facing right now
will not determine the nature of your being,
this is how you are,
because devotion is that which is devoid of you.
There is no sense of me when are devout.
If you constantly bow down to everything, genuinely,
not as an exercise,
not because somebody has told you,
genuinely if you bow down to everything that you see,
within yourself and outside of yourself then you will see
there will be no such thing as you left.
When you are devoid of you, you are always the same.
Once your way of being has become consistent
now we can take you somewhere,
it's possible to move,
it's possible to make a journey,
otherwise the journey will be a deceptive journey,
you will not go anywhere because you’re too fluid.
So that’s exactly what we are going to change.
We don’t doubt a bit that
If you are threatened with a gun you will lick the… that man’s boots.
Do we have any doubt?
No, you definitely will,
but if the same man comes begging in front of your house
but if the man pulls out a gun
This has to change.
This has to change.
That’s what devotion is
to change that,
that situations and entities which appear in front of you
will not determine the nature of who you are,
you will always be the same way.
If that firmness,
if that solidity is not brought into your life,
how can you be taken somewhere?
Sadhguru: Love has become a relevant thing in human life
only because human emotion is a strong aspect of being human being.
In human life, emotion is a very powerful thing.
even in this day and age,
though people think they are very intellectual,
even today their emotions are the strongest aspect.
Yes or no?
It’s the most intense aspect of their life.
They claim they are intellectual,
but their intellect is never so intense,
but their emotions are intense.
Maybe not love,
maybe not compassion,
but maybe anger,
maybe irritation
these are all emotions.
So, emotion is a very important aspect of being human.
Now, we are only talking about,
what type of emotion do you want to have?
Now if you
do you have a mind?
Do you have a mind?
Yes.
Would you want it to be sharp or dull?
Participants: Sharp.
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Participants: Sharp.
Sadhguru: Why?
Sadhguru: It works that way, isn't it?
Similarly, if you have emotions,
do you want to have sweet emotions or bitter emotions?
Participants: Sweet emotions.
Sadhguru: Sweet emotions.
It works better that way, isn't it?
So, love means just that.
You have transformed your emotions into sweetness.
Now, I want to be in love without emotion.
That’s a very European idea.
Love is an emotion.
It is the sweetness of your emotion which we’re referring to as love.
If the same emotion becomes bitter, we call it hate.
Usually, it is the people whom you love that you hate, isn't it?
Some time ago - you loved them,
now you hate them.
You don’t hate than man who is just walking on the street, isn't it?
Some love should have happened and now the coin fell another way
and now it's become hate.
Yes?
So, it's just the same coin - if it falls this way, it becomes love;
if it falls that way, it becomes hatred.
Don’t think they’re too far away.
They’re pretty close.
One little thing goes wrong, love becomes hate, isn't it?
So; how to be in love without emotion?
Love is an emotion.
Now the choice is only do you want your emotions to be sweet,
pleasant or unpleasant emotions?
That’s your choice.
It's an obvious choice, isn't it?
But most people are keeping their emotions bitter most of the time.
Bitterness need not necessarily mean they’re in active hatred.
They are in irritation,
they are in agitation,
they are in some kind of… fear is also an emotion,
anxiety is an emotion.
It is in some level of unpleasantness.
If you make your emotions very pleasant,
then life will be very pleasant.
Even today, most people experience as a moment of love
as the most profound experience of their life.
It is not,
but they experience it that way because
that is the most intense thing they’ve touched
that is the deepest dimension of life they’ve touched is a moment of love.
So, they raise it to heaven.
people are transporting it to heaven,
people are talking about divine love.
You do not know whether God loves or not.
Human beings are capable of love if they are willing.
Dog is capable of love.
When human beings fail, you get yourself a dog.
If you get a dog, twelve-year guaranteed love affair.
Yes.
Don’t… do not underestimate this.
You get yourself a dog, every day you come home,
what a welcome you get!
Your wife, she is no good
one, one day she is one, one way.
Your children - they are not even interested whether you come home or go.
But your dog, every day what an excited welcome he gives you!
Nobody is capable of this, isn't it?
Every day, without fail.
He’ll never show disinterest in you.
He is such a boost for you,
Dog is love for sure.
Maybe it’s just a spelling mistake! (Laughter)
You know, typos can happen.
Now, if you made yourself in such a way
nobody around you can love you,
then the only succor you have is
somebody must love you, long distance from there.
It's the unfortunate way to live.
God loves you - it’s the most unfortunate way to live.
That means you made yourself in such a way nobody can even look at you.
If people around you cannot help loving you,
that’s a nice way to be, isn't it?
You may not be great, may be at least you are cute.
Yes?
So, in yoga,
we don’t look at anything as love, hate, happiness, misery
we don’t look at it that way.
We just look at it this way
do you want to be pleasant or unpleasant?
If you become pleasant in your body, we call it health.
If you become very pleasant, we call it pleasure.
If your mind becomes pleasant, we call it peace.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call it joy.
If your emotions become pleasant, we call it love.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call it compassion.
If your very life energies become pleasant, we call this bliss.
If it becomes very pleasant, we call it ecstasy.
If your surroundings become pleasant, we call it success.
So, the other names that you give are just leading to confusion.
Should I be loving?
You don’t have to be loving.
Just be pleasant in your body,
pleasant in your mind,
pleasant in your emotions,
pleasant in your energies
you’ll be a wonderful being.
If your emotions are pleasant, if somebody comes here,
you can share that pleasantness with them.
If your emotions are unpleasant,
for sure, you’ll share that with people, isn't it?
Yes or no?
So, you cannot
you cannot do something that you are not.
If this is feeling pleasant now, it will naturally be pleasant to everything.
If this is feeling unpleasant right now, it will be nasty to everything.
So instead of seeing how to make this pleasant,
you want to be pleasant to somebody -
that is being loving.
You don’t have to be loving.
If everything within you has become pleasant,
whatever is needed in that moment, you will do.
If you need to say pleasant things, you will say that.
If you need to say some hard things, you will say that,
but without any unpleasantness in you.
That’s important, isn't it?
If you’ll have to fight a war, you’ll fight it
without any unpleasantness in you.
That’s important.
Then you will do everything only to the extent it's necessary.
You will not do… overdo anything.
If you say ‘I love somebody’,
you’ll exaggerate things about the people whom you love.
You’ll exaggerate good things about them.
If you say ‘I hate somebody’, you’ll exaggerate bad things about them.
You’ll never say anything the way it is.
People go blind with things that they love, isn't it?
They have no sense, they’ll lose all their sense.
If they hate also, they’ll lose sense.
If you like, you’ll lose sense;
if you dislike, you’ll lose sense.
The doorway of life is in being equanimous
that you’re able to see everything just the way it is.
Now you are pleasant to somebody not because somebody is nice.
You’re pleasant to somebody because you’re pleasant, that's all.
This is more guaranteed
it's a more guaranteed love affair, isn't it?
You’re being pleasant to somebody because you’re pleasant.
If I am being pleasant to you because you are nice,
tomorrow if you are not so nice,
something else will happen, isn't it?
if you mortgage your pleasantness to something outside of you,
you being pleasant or unpleasant is only by chance.
Keeping this one pleasant is your business.
If this one is pleasant
what… with whatever it interacts, it will generate pleasantness.
Now, you have not managed to make this pleasant,
you are trying to be pleasant to somebody
and that is subject to so many things.
If you have to be pleasant, they have to be fixed the way you want them
and that’s not possible.
Nobody can be fixed the way you want them.
You’re not able to do that even with one person, isn't it?
You cannot even fix one person the way you want them,
forget about the whole world.
The more you try this, the more bitterness and unpleasantness will happen.
That is why in the so-called most intimate relationships,
maximum amount of unpleasantness happens.
So, this is because you’re trying to do something that you are not.
You’re trying to be loving when you are not pleasant.
When you’re feeling bitter, you try to be loving and see,
it’ll destroy you, isn't it?
Yes or no?
You’ve tried all these things, isn't it?
It's destructive.
When you’re feeling pleasant,
it is effortless.
So, you just have to look at
why is it you being pleasant or unpleasant is mortgaged to external situations.
‘If everybody around me is unpleasant,
how can I be pleasant?’
Especially if everybody around you is unpleasant,
it's all the more important that you’re pleasant, isn't it?
Yes or no?
If everybody around you is in a mess,
is it not all the more important that you’re pleasant?
If everybody around you is unhealthy,
is it not very important at least you’re healthy,
even if you want to take care of them?
Is there any logic to
‘everybody is unhealthy, so let me also get sick?’
What is the logic behind this?
So, if people around you are unpleasant,
it becomes even more important that you’re pleasant.
[Questioner] When you say that yourself and your body have to go together,
that is clear to me, but like mind goes somewhere else, mind doesn’t go with you all the time.
You are sitting here but mind can be elsewhere, so that can be separate at times,
at times it can be with you, so this is my first question and after
[Sadhguru] Let’s go one at a time.
[Questioner] Ok.
[Sadhguru] Now, your mind also doesn’t go anywhere.
It is here thinking about something. Does it go somewhere?
Your mind doesn’t go anywhere, it is here and thinking about something else but still it is here, isn’t it?
Neither your body goes somewhere nor your mind goes somewhere nor you go somewhere.
They’re always one composite whole.
If you want to do anything you have to do something that works for all of them.
You can’t handle this separately, that one separately and this one separately, they’re always together, isn’t it?
Your mind doesn’t go anywhere, did you lose it?
It is just that you’re being deceived by the imagination of your mind.
It is sitting here and imagining something, it is not going anywhere
but you’re so identified and lost that you think the mind is going somewhere.
Mind doesn’t travel anywhere, it’s very much here, isn’t it?
You need to understand this: Why your mind is going on with
uncontrollable endless thought is you’re identified with things that you are not.
The moment you get identified with something that you are not, then mind is non-stop activity.
You’re identified with too many things and you’re trying to stop your mind.
I’m telling you, if you try for a million years it’s not going to happen. It cannot happen.
If you take away your wrong identifications then you will see this moment,
mind will be just like a mirror, not saying anything, just reflecting everything.
That’s how mind should be. Your mind is a mechanism, works best
only when there is clarity in it, isn’t it? Isn’t it so?
Your mind is not here to think up all kinds of fancy things. That’s a distraction in life.
Your mind is here to give you clarity and penetration into life,
but right now mind is just a huge ball of confusion simply because
you got identified with so many things that you are not and now you’re trying to hold it back.
There is no way to hold it back. You ate very bad food, now there’s gas in the stomach.
You can’t hold it. You’ve eaten bad food, the consequence is there.
You got wrongly identified with too many things, now this is going on endlessly.
You cannot stop it, it doesn’t matter what you do.
You think of God, God himself will go take you to many places.
Now, you’re sitting here and you’re trying to meditate, but you’re thinking
of your bar or restaurant or friend or cinema or something.
Now, people told you, ‘think about God, everything will be okay.’
If you think about Rama, or Krishna then you will find you will go to cinema with Rama.
That’s the nature of the mind. Rama himself will take you to the bar.
Rama himself will take you to the restaurant.
You can’t stop it because you’ve gotten yourself identified with things that you are not.
No way to stop it.
So what’s being done here is not about controlling your mind.
To bring an awareness as to what you’re not.
Right now to start with, the most fundamental identity is your body.
You’re identified with your body, the clothes that you wear, your hairstyle, your goatee also, aren’t you?
Very much identified, isn’t it? Your wife, your children, your family,
your education, your religion, endless number of identifications.
With all these identities you want a quiet mind. There’s no such thing.
That’s why we gave you a simple device called Shoonya
where you create a little distance from the mind.
Once distance happens, even if it's a noisy mind, still it doesn’t matter. Disengaging from the mind.
Once you disengage from the mind, you disengage from all identity
because it’s the mind which manufactures identifications, isn’t it?
So don't think up all kinds of things, just employ the device.
Things will happen.
Things that you have not imagined will happen.
Being …trying to be morally good
see your
let's say your children
you are good to them
as far as you know how to be.
Are you good to them because of morality?
Because somebody has told you
‘you should not kill your children’
is that the reason why you are not killing them?
Are you being good to your children
and not killing them
because somebody has told you that
you must be good to your children,
that is good morals?
Is it so?
No.
So, why are you so good to them?
Why do you love them?
Why not somebody else?
Hum?
Because they are our children.
Why are they your children?
They were born from us.
Because in some way you see them as a part of yourself, isn't it?
In some way you see them as a part of yourself.
Though they grow up and
turn your enemies sometimes,
still somewhere as far as you are concerned
you see them as a part of yourself,
that you are able to look beyond all their nonsense,
all their problems, all their everything
and still reach out to them, isn't it?
Simply because you see them as a part of yourself.
Yes?
That’s all the thing is, isn't it?
So, anything that you experience as a part of yourself,
with that you don’t need morality obviously. Isn't it so?
Yes?
Are you understanding what I’m saying?
Because you just leave out one step
and when we go there again you go back to the number one step.
So, anything that you experience as a part of yourself,
with that you do not need any morality. Is it so?
You don’t have to try to be good.
Morality means you’re trying to be good, isn't it?
So, yoga means to experience everything as a part of yourself.
Right now,
let's you gave birth to a child
it could have happened to many of you,
you don't know
and in the hospital they interchanged your children with somebody else.
You bring this child,
this was born biologically to somebody else but
you believe this is yours
and you love this child any less?
Your involvement with the child any less?
Your DNA not there but still you love it?
So, it is just your willingness to include somebody
so you are capable.
It is not that it has to come from your body,
it is just that if you are willing it's possible, isn't it?
If you are little more sensible maybe you adopted a child and
love this child as much as anybody.
Why you did not bear your wife or your husband,
do you?
They were born by somebody else
and generally your husbands were born
by that horrible woman called mother-in-law
but you love that man, isn't it?
Isn't it so?
So, it is just a question of your willingness.
If you are willing
you can experience everything as a part of yourself.
When you experience everything as a part of yourself
you do not need morality.
When you know the vulgarity of what is you and what is not you,
only then you need morality; otherwise no morality.
Why does a person who experience everybody as himself need morality?
With morals you are only trying to be good;
you will never become good,
please see this.
You can hold back your hands
but you can't hold back your mind, isn't it?
Can you?
You can hold back your physical body;
can you hold back your mind?
It goes everywhere and does everything, isn't it?
Sadhguru: Once we are born as human beings
life got complicated
if we had come here like any other creature on the planet
stomach full, life settled.
Once we come as human beings,
stomach empty - only one problem,
stomach full - one hundred problems;
because what we refer to as human
really begins only after survival is taken care of.
Only when survival is fulfilled,
the traits of being human will find expression.
Till as long as we are struggling for survival,
we are also just another biological entity like any other creature.
So what does it mean to be human,
what is the significance?
Because every other creature can fulfill
almost everything that most human beings are doing without so much fuss.
We are born, they are also born just like us.
We grow up with lot of fuss, they grow up with… without much fuss.
For us earning a living is a very big thing,
all of them earn their own living.
We may reproduce, they reproduce.
We die, they die.
All this with… we do with enormous fuss,
they do it without much fuss - in a ecofriendly manner (Laughs) they conduct their life.
Everything is a big fuss.
Why it is so is
human life is not fulfilled by fulfilling the basic requirements of survival.
If we could eat well and everything would be okay,
then it would be very simple to feed the world.
But that’s not how it is
because for every other creature nature has drawn two lines,
within which they live and die.
For a human being there is only a bottom line,
there is no top line.
He can aspire for anything.
Because there is no top line,
people are struggling.
Or in other words what we are struggling with is
not our bondage as usually popularly it is said
we are truly struggling with our freedom.
We can be whichever way we want, that’s our struggle.
If our lives were fixed like every other creature’s life
we would also be… stomach full, we would sit peacefully, isn’t it?
Do you see that
if our lives were contained like that of an earthworm or a grasshopper
or a cat or a dog
we would have no issues
stomach full, everything fine.
Because our lives are not contained
or because there is no top line we can aspire for just about anything,
that’s our struggle.
This is an evolutionary problem, in the sense,
what we are struggling with actually is our intelligence and awareness.
Probably some scientists have been suggesting this
that… serious I know
so called serious scientists who’ve suggested this
it’s appalling and shocking that they actually suggested this
they said, “When a child is born if we do a small brain surgery,
we can take away most of the crime on the planet,
everybody would be peaceful.”
Actually if you take away half the brain nobody would be unhappy,
you could feed them with a tube and everybody would sit here peacefully.
You won’t need any yoga, meditation, nothing, if you remove half the brain.
If you take away the possibilities, the problems will go away,
everybody knows that.
Yes?
If you keep all the possibilities open
and still you are not a problem, that’s a wonderful way to be.
No possibilities, no problems
that’s not life, that’s death.
So what is this solution for the human predicament
because no matter what happens seems to be unfulfilled?
Right now living in this town whatever aspirations you have,
the moment it is fulfilled you have a next aspiration.
Isn’t it so?
No matter where you are in your life,
whether you are the king of this town or you are down there
you want something to happen in your life.
If that happens you want the next thing to happen,
if that happens you want the next thing to happen.
So why are you going in installments like this?
Suppose I make you the king or queen of this planet
maa, don’t look at me hopefully (Laughter),
will I commit such a blunder (Laughs)?
Suppose we make the king… make you the king or queen of this planet,
would you be fulfilled, I’m asking you?
Would you be fulfilled?
No,
you would want the other planets and the stars and the galaxies
because there is something within a human being
which is not willing to settle for any boundaries.
It is aspiring for a boundless possibility.
If you’re seeking boundlessness,
seeking it through physical means is a hopeless case.
You aspiration is fantastic because if you really look at it
sitting here if you really look at it
suppose right now you become the king of this planet you were not satisfied,
we made you the king of the solar system not satisfied,
we made you the king of the universe not satisfied
if you really look at this what you are aspiring for is infinite nature.
Your aspiration is fantastic but the means is miserable,
in the sense
suppose you’re driving your car today and you saw the moon
and you felt like going there.
Sometimes the advertisements are so exaggerated,
they told you,
“If you really floor the accelerator it will go to the moon.”
If you try very hard you may go beyond the moon
but you will not go to the moon.
Yes or no?
Because a car is not a suitable vehicle to go to the moon,
you need another kind of vehicle to go to the moon.
So similarly here,
through physical means we are trying to become infinite.
It’s… Aspiration is wonderful
but the vehicle is miserable
because the nature of physicality is like this
physical means it comes with a defined boundary.
Only because there is a defined boundary we can call this a physical body.
If I take away all boundaries of this,
can you call this a physical body if it is everywhere?
Physicality means
The fundamental nature of physicality is a defined boundary.
Without a boundary there is no physical nature
but right now there is something within you
which is constantly aspiring to break the boundaries.
Just look at yourself and see,
suppose we imprisoned you in a 5x5 cubicle,
you will be very miserable.
Tomorrow we announce your liberation and release you into a 10x10 cubicle,
it will be wonderful for a day but again you will feel miserable.
Then day after tomorrow we’ll release you into a 100x100 cubicle, you will feel great for three days,
again it’s the same thing.
What I’m asking you is it doesn’t matter how big the boundary is,
the moment you realize there is a boundary you want to break it.
Yes or no?
This is the nature of the human being.
It doesn’t matter all kinds of pacifist philosophies have been taught,
“Be content with what you have,
don’t aspire for more than what…” you know, “do not…” (Laughs) all kinds of things.
It’s not worked for a single human being
it only works when you are sick or when you are dying.
You are sick and down today, today if I tell you,
“You should not aspire for anything, be satisfied with what you have,”
you will say, “Yes, anything is okay, just get me well.”
Tomorrow you are
once again the energy is back,
hmm ready for something more.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Only when you are beaten and down,
then these philosophies will work.
For a… For a healthy living human being
these philosophies of “Be happy with what you have”, doesn’t work.
Now does it mean to say a human being has to be eternally in turmoil,
eternally in struggle?
No.
What we do in terms of our aspiration is just this
essentially nothing is going to fulfill us
unless we touch a boundless state.
And boundlessness is not going to happen within the limitations of the physical.
When I say within the limitations of the physical,
right now your whole experience of life is limited to the physical.
See your experience of life right now is happening
because you can see, you can hear, you can smell,
you can taste and you can touch.
This is the only way you know that you are here, isn’t it?
It is through five sense organs that you are experiencing everything.
These five sense organs cannot perceive anything other than physical.
You can only see the physical,
you can only hear the physical,
you can only smell, taste and touch the physical.
That which is not physical is not within the ambit of these five sense organs.
So if you do not transcend the five senses,
there is no possibility of experiencing anything beyond physicality.
If you do not experience anything beyond physicality,
this longing of wanting to be something more,
something more endlessly going on
you are not looking for more, you are looking for all
and all is not possible through physical means.
(Sadhguru): In yoga,
we see a human being as five sheaths or five layers of bodies.
These are known as
Annamaya kosha,
Manomaya kosha,
Pranamaya kosha,
Vigyanamaya kosha
and Anandamaya kosha.
Translating it into English would mean,
Annamaya kosha means food body.
The body, the physical body that you have is just the accumulation of food that you have eaten.
It is something that you gather.
Manomaya kosha means
a layer of intelligence which is capable of accumulating knowledge.
But there is a layer of intelligence.
It is not here or here here, somewhere.
Every cell in the body has its own intelligence.
Yes or no?
So intelligence is all across.
Accumulation of knowledge is all across.
When I say this,
people will always think,
generally the thought is memory means it’s in your head.
No, no, no.
Your body has a million-fold more memory than your mind.
Right now, your great grandfather’s nose is sitting on your face
because something in the body remembers. Isn’t it?
Yes or no?
A million years ago how your forefathers looked,
unknowingly still your hair is like that,
your texture of the skin is like this,
your complexion is like this.
Your body remembers.
Your body remembers a million-fold more than your mind can ever imagine.
So, both in terms of intelligence
right now what is happening in a single cell in your body,
can you logically, mentally or intellectually decipher
what’s happening in one cell in your body?
One molecule of DNA what’s happening is too much to know.
So the intelligence and the memory in the body
is way beyond what happens in the bone box that you call as your head.
It is just that this part of your intelligence
can generate thought
and because you have become very attached to your thought,
you think intelligence is all coming from here.
No.
This is exuding much more intelligence than your brain can ever think of.
This is the science of yoga.
One dimension of it,
let me speak about a very small aspect of this.
Essentially one aspect of yoga means
understanding the geometry of existence.
When I say the geometry of existence,
for example,
this solar system is functioning the way it’s functioning,
one thing is all this life including yourself
you are all solar powered aren't you?
everything all life on this planet is solar powered isn't it?
I was, you know like about six weeks ago,
I was in a open helicopter,
we were just at about 4,500 feet,
everybody knows every thousand feet,
so much temperature drops,
so you prepare for that and go.
But suddenly it became extremely cold,
so cold that we had to come down.
So we were just discussing because the cloud cover came,
suddenly it became so cold we just couldn’t stay there.
So we were just discussing if sun disappears
how long would it take for the earth to freeze up.
In our calculations we thought maybe six months,
maybe three months, something.
Then when I came down, I just checked out,
in eighteen hours all the oceans on the planet will be frozen solid rock;
it will be frozen into solid ice in just eighteen hours time.
So you clearly know that sun is the basic source of energy.
Everything in this planet is solar powered.
So, the geometry of the sun, the planet, the moon and the other planets
has a role to play in everything that happens upon this planet.
All life is associated with this.
Now when you say ‘intelligence’,
when you say ‘mind’,
I believe you are referring to intelligence,
if you are talking about the thought process
that essentially happens in the neurons in your brain, which we know.
But if you’re talking about mind as an intelligence,
it is just all over in this body
and everywhere in the Existence.
The very earth that you walk upon is tremendously intelligent.
Have you ever seen that you’ve planted a mango tree
and by mistake it goofed and produced a coconut?
Did it ever do that?
No such thing ever happened.
Just its neighbor is producing coconuts,
by mistake did it ever produce a coconut?
Such a nut they have… Nature has never produced, isn’t it?
But employing your logical intelligence many times,
you end up into that kind of situations.
So you need to understand this,
both in terms of intelligence and memory,
every cell in your body carries much more than your whole brain carries.
One cell in your body,
one molecule of DNA carries information
that your whole brain cannot decipher,
that much information it carries.
What happened in the last few million years it remembers
and still manifesting, isn’t it?
So it is not in any one place.
Not even just within you,
it is all across you.
The whole Creation is just intelligence.
Sadhguru: There is anger in the world.
there is anger in the people’s minds,
individual minds.
There is no such thing as anger in the world, isn't it?
There is anger in you,
there is anger in that person,
there is anger in this person.
Are you right now angry?
Participants: No
Sadhguru: Thank you. (Laughter &amp; Applause)
Right now you are not angry, that means there is no anger in this hall right now, isn't it?
But you can get angry.
You can get angry.
Right now there is no anger in this hall.
But you can get angry.
So this is one thing that we have to see.
Anger is not there.
What we call as life energy, what is life
you can make this into anger,
you can make this into love,
you can make this into compassion,
you can make it into frustration,
you can make it into depression,
you can make it whatever you want.
The choice is yours. (Applause)
if you had retained the choice,
if the choice was really with you,
definitely you would have chosen the most pleasant thing, isn't it,
whatever is the most pleasant thing.
Generally people are talking about love, joy, blissfulness
because people understand these as the most pleasant things in their life.
If you had a choice about what to make yourself of right now in this moment,
would you choose pleasantness or unpleasantness?
Pleasantness,
there is no question about that, isn't it?
If I ask you ‘do you want to live in pleasant atmospheres or unpleasant atmospheres?’
Pleasantness.
‘Do you want to be pleasant in your mind or unpleasant in your mind?’
Pleasantness.
‘Do you want to be pleasant in your body unpleasantness in your body?’
Pleasantness.
All you are seeking is just this, please see.
You may believe that you are seeking money, property, God whatever.
All that you are seeking is just this
you want to be pleasant in your body,
in your mind, in your emotion and in your energies.
This is all you are seeking.
“No I am seeking God.”
No;
if somebody has told you if you seek God you will become ecstatic.
“No, I want to go to heaven.”
Somebody has told you heaven is a more pleasant place than this one,
that’s why you want to go there
or you made a hell out of your life, whichever way.
Fundamentally you are seeking pleasantness, isn't it?
Now this, the same scientist
because he talked about Emerson using the word Brahma,
this scientist tried to look for a word for the,
to name the word,
to name the chemical which is being received by the cannibas receptors in the brain.
He wanted to give a unique name
and he studied every scripture on the planet to find an appropriate name,
and the most beautiful thing is
no scripture on the planet except from India
ever talks about bliss and ecstasy.
Everybody talks about salvation.
Everybody talks about your sins being washed away, at the most peace.
Nobody talks about blissfulness and ecstasy.
So he called this chemical
which is produced in the body as Anandamide. (Laughs)
You know Ananda?
Anandamide.
So cannibas receptors are waiting to receive Anandamide.
How much Anandamide you produce in this system
that is how blissful you will be.
It can’t be taken
if you take it in the form of an injection you will become an addict.
But if you generate your own Anandamide you will be blissful always.
So if you are blissful would you be angry?
No.
Anger
Life has found expression in the form of anger
only because this life is not blissful, isn't it?
If this was blissful every moment of its existence,
question of anger
or controlling anger or putting anger down doesn’t even arise within you, isn't it?
So what is needed is
yes, there are situations in the world which may be causing anger,
but I am telling you if you eliminate one situation,
another situation will pop up.
See within your own family
or within your own situation,
do you see for every small thing people can get angry?
Need not be a major issue.
Yes?
Not a life and death kind of issue.
A simple thing in your house can make you angry
or somebody else in the family angry. Isn't it so?
So it is not necessarily by settling all the problems on the planet
that we will eliminate anger.
First of all if we teach ways of joyfulness and blissfulness right from childhood
we have not focused on this.
As a humanity,
we have not focused on making our children joyful.
If they are making lot of joyful sounds in the house
usually adults will go and say “Shut up.” (Laughs)
We have not encouraged joy and bliss as a part of our life.
If people were more joyful,
did you have to talk about controlling anger?
It wouldn’t come, isn't it?
We need religions of joy,
we need politics of joy,
we need economics of joy,
we need to bring that aspect into our life on all levels.
If that is not brought into our life in every possible way,
and methods to keep the system joyful above all
because without that it will become a fake joy that you are pretending
or you are trying to be joyful.
Now if you are producing enough Anandamide in your system you would be joyful, isn't it?
I can show you a million people for whom we have taught
how to produce more Anandamide in the system
that without any reason people are just happy.
People think, “Oh if they all become happy they will become useless.”
It is not so.
Please look at your own life and see.
On a particular day when you are happy
are you willing to do more
or on a particular day when you are unhappy are you willing to do more?
Hmm?
When you are happy you are willing to do anything, isn't it?
When you are unhappy you have to drag yourself through life.
When you are happy you are loving, you are generous,
you are flexible, you are sensible, everything.
When you are unhappy you can be real mean and nasty, isn't it?
If you meet any human being when he is joyful he is a wonderful human being.
If you meet the same human being when he is unhappy
he can be a very nasty human being.
This is so with every human being, isn't it?
Sadhguru: The word linga comes from the root word leena
Linga means the form.
These lingas or these energy forms or these ellipsoids can be created with various qualities for various purposes.
There are some lingas created for health,
some for well-being and prosperity,
for… some for spiritual progress,
some for meditativeness,
like this various types of lingas can be created.
Essentially they can be categorized as seven different ways.
These seven can be further multiplied into many, many kinds.
The uniqueness of Dhyanalinga is it has all the seven dimensions of it
but essentially it is tweaked towards meditativeness without any instruction.
If you simply sit in the sphere of Dhyanalinga you become meditative.
How many of you been there?
Have you been there?
Okay.
No instruction, simply go sit there for ten minutes
you will become meditative by your own nature without any instruction.
So the idea and the science and the technology behind this is
that you create an energy form which will do something that you want to do
for a long period of time.
A form is also referred to as a yantra.
Yantra means today a machine.
A simple form is a yantra.
As you mix these many forms and make it into a more complex thing,
then it becomes a machine.
Various forms put together is a larger machine, isn't it?
So similarly a simple form you take and add many, many, many, many parts to it
and it becomes a complex machine.
So it is in a way like a meditation machine.
You simply sit there you become meditative.
Many people – this is the experience of thousands of people;
they come there thinking they want to sit there for ten minutes
they sit there and they get up, it's two hours.
They’re sitting right there because once you are meditative,
your sense of time is just gone.
Time rules you only because you are strongly physical.
The more physical you are, the more difficult it is to pass time, please see this.
Have you noticed this?
If you are intellectually active, time passes off much more quickly.
If you are beyond the intellect, time just disappears in your experience
but if you are just physical, time doesn’t go.
You fidget, tch, tch. Isn't it so?
The more physical you are,
the more time tortures you.
Time torture is only for the physical.
If you are not physical, time doesn’t torture you.
To become meditative means to create distance between you and your physicality,
not to give it up but to carry it loosely.
If you carry it loosely you can use it the way you want,
when you don’t want, you can drop it.
If you get enmeshed in it everything that is the quality of the physical also torments you.
All the limitations of the physical infect you and bother you through the life.
So meditativeness means on one level it just means
that you are creating a distance between you and your physicality.
Or in other words it is a simple journey from ‘Asatoma Satgamaya.’
What is not true to true.
What is it that’s not true,
what is not true is just this
you gathered this, it's a fact but now you believe it is… this is you,
this is not true, isn't it?
So truth means you moved away from untruth.
Truth is not some kind of a thing that you do.
If you don’t lie you are truthful.
You don’t have to do anything to be truthful, isn't it?
If you have to lie, it's a very complex exercise.
Yes or no?
Hmm?
You know it by experience. Don’t you?
If you have to tell a lie, it's a very complex exercise.
To be truthful what do you have to do?
Nothing, even a idiot can be truthful.
Yes or no?
It’s very simple.
You simply sit here you are truthful, isn't it?
If you want to tell a lie, it takes a lot of complexity.
So truth is not something that you do.
You move away from untruth you are truthful.
It's just that simple.
So Dhyanalinga is just a tool towards that.
Questioner: I noticed here that
a majority of the people have a lot of devotion towards Shiva
but I came from the United States,
from south Mississippi
and this yoga is new to me,
like three months new to me
and I have an extreme amount of devotion towards you
because I’ve experienced it
but I don’t feel the devotion towards Shiva.
I know we say the mantra
but do we need to have that devotion towards him
to progress on the spiritual path?
Sadhguru: Shiva doesn’t need your devotion. (Laughter)
Just yesterday someone was reading a passage to me
from a book written by Friedrich Nietzsche.
You’ve heard of him?
Not… he is not from Missouri.
You’re from… you're from Mississippi?
I’m sorry, he’s not from Mississippi, from Germany.
So Friedrich Nietzsche is saying
or his character is saying
“Only because there are so many people to receive the light,
the sun can enjoy coming up”
this is German bullshit. (Laughter)
If none of you are here, sun will still come up the same way,
with the same glory. Hmm?
Yes or no?
He does not come up for you.
This is a disease that human beings have got
they think the whole Existence is human centric.
It is not so.
What is here is not human.
A tremendous phenomena is happening here,
nothing to do with humanity.
Well, it has lot to do with humanity but it's not of human nature.
So Shiva doesn’t need your devotion.
It is just that
if you carry devotion in your heart
What is devotion, let’s look at this.
On one level devotion means a certain sweetness of your heart.
It's the best way to be for any human being.
If you do not carry this sweetness in your heart
you will be...
life will do things to you and you will become bitter.
Don’t think you can insulate yourself.
You can build a home,
you can build a family,
you can build a huge bank balance,
you can be born in Mississippi
but you will not remain insulated.
Insulation happens...
works only for a certain period of time;
after that, one way or the other life gets you.
If there is no sweetness in your heart
you will become bitter, resentful
this has happened to a large segment of humanity.
So on one level devotion means an enduring sweetness of your heart;
a kind of sweetness
that does not depend on any outside help.
Suppose you fall in love with somebody
does it happen in Mississippi? (Laughter)
Suppose you fall in love with somebody,
your heart becomes sweet.
But for how long – there is no guarantee.
It can become extremely bitter
because of a love affair.
Yes or no?
We are not wishing that but it can become...
either because of situations
or because of disease
or because of death
or because of loss,
so many ways,
or simply because of boredom.
the person that you thought was most exciting and fantastic,
after a few years you look at them
‘did I do this mistake?’ (Laughter)
You can't believe it!
So many things can happen.
So devotion is an enduring sweetness of heart,
does not depend on anybody.
‘So should I be devoted to Shiva?’
It doesn’t make any difference to Him
but if you are a devotee
devotion is another kind of intelligence
which simple intellect is unable to understand.
The nature of a rudimentary intellect is,
if you want to know anything we have dissect it.
Yes?
If you become interested in somebody,
dissect them.
Well you don’t do it physically because the law doesn’t permit it
but you mentally dissect them, isn't it?
Yes or no?
You mentally dissect them
and come to a convenient conclusion,
not truth,
a convenient conclusion as you like it
and one day when that conclusion falls apart
you will become bitter.
The very nature of the intellect is
to put things apart.
By putting things apart
you can know the utility of what it is.
If I analyze this person
I can learn how to make use of her
but I will not know her.
Only if I completely include her I will know her,
there is no other way.
If you...
if you give a flower to somebody who is intellectually strong,
if you give a flower to a scientist
first thing is he will rip it off
because he wants to know what is inside.
A poet will sing songs about the flower.
He does not know what is inside,
he does not care what is inside
but it gives him joy.
A mystic will become a flower.
If he looks at a flower
he will become the flower
because for him even a small little flower that is blossoming
in
something unnoticeable in the grass,
even there the hand of the Creator is actively there, isn't it?
Hmm?
Actively there,
as active as it is in this one, (Referring to oneself) nothing less.
If you pay enough attention to a blade of grass
you will see it has been done with enormous attention;
it's been created with a phenomenal sense of attention.
It's not been just made like that,
‘okay just a blade of grass’
it was not made like that.
Whoever made it paid enormous attention to it.
So a devotee is a different dimension of intelligence.
He will see things that nobody else will see
because devotion means you are devoid of yourself.
Between you and the ultimate reality
there is only one barrier, that is yourself.
So devotion means you must become devoid of yourself.
If that is not possible, at least you should reduce this heap.
If you reduce this heap of garbage
suddenly you see life explodes
life explodes in ways that you have not imagined possible.
So it's not about shiva; it's about you.
But you must walk with devotion. What you are devoted to, it doesn’t matter.
You must walk with absolute devotion.
Devotion means you are devoid of yourself.
Devotion means a heightened state of receptivity because you are not... you are no more full of yourself,
there is emptiness in you, so something can touch you, something can enter you, something can reside in you.
You are looking at everything through your psychological mess and you understand your intellect as the only intelligence.
Intellect is a very rudimentary form of intelligence; useful only for utilitarian purposes.
To make a living, to survive in the world your intellect is needed.
For any thing else... if you want to acess any other dimension your intellect is not enough
A deeper dimension of intelligence in you has to function. If this has to function, to be in devotion is the easiest way to do it.
Momita: A question that has come through the Facebook,
from Doug Brewster.
He asks “How do you see GMOs?
Are they part of the reality unfolding
or are they are a spiritually corrupt food
that has been driven by man to feed the body and line pockets,
rather than food that feeds the soul?
What are your thoughts on this? (Few Laugh)”
Sadhguru: The
I think there is whole lot of corruption in the question,
whoever Doug from wherever.
First let us understand,
food does not feed the soul.
Food feeds the body.
Let’s not complicate things.
Like people are talking about soul mates and you know stuff,
body needs a mate, understandable (Laughter),
mind needs a mate to some extent.
The soul if it needs a mate, it’s a lost (Devi Shetty Laughs)...
it’s not a practical thing.
So soul does not need food,
it’s not
first of all you don’t know what it is.
You just use the word because everybody is using it, anyway.
GMO
I think meddling with nature at that level is quite irresponsible.
These are purely commercial forces,
definitely not concerned with long term well-being of the human beings.
We should have never allowed it into this country.
I believe the new government is not going to go that way,
in India at least (Applause).
Tracey: I want to explore
the way we educate physicians in this country
there is a lot of research around this in the United States,
medical education that we take caring compassionate people into our medical schools.
So it is not look as though the problem is our selection.
People are calm with open hearts and with compassion and love
and there is a lot of data that looks at
what happens one year into medical training,
two years into medical training
what the studies show is that one year, two years into training
empathy and compassion in the people that that were empathetic, loving people and they came in
has to… has plummeted and they self-report that their medical care - not surprisingly - is different, you know,
this is not surprising.
I guess the simple way to say this is,
I believe if we cannot sit with our own suffering as physicians,
we can’t sit with the suffering of our patients.
I am comfortable dealing with your diabetes and hypertension
because I have the tools to fix that I believe
and I am trained to do that
but I don’t even want to open the door if I even knew
what questions to ask that might reveal your suffering
because I don’t know how to be present with that.
So I… I’d love your thoughts on that
those comments and then how do we begin to train
and how our learners or physicians to be in other healthcare providers
put emotion at the same level as the intellect?
Sadhguru: See, we are still
see if you want flowers to grow in your garden,
you don’t have to think flowers,
you don’t have to chant flowers.
You just have to think of soil, manure, water, sunlight
nothing to do with flowers;
if you handle filth well, flowers will happen. (Laughs)
Tracey: (Laughs) That’s good.
If you handle filth well, flowers will happen… (To her colleagues: Write that down.) (Laughter)
Sadhguru: Those people who think of flowers,
they will end up with Chinese-made plastic flowers.
Tracey: Yes.
Sadhguru: They will not have flowers.
So we are again thinking of empathy, compassion, love -
these are all consequences of a human being,
being in a certain way.
We are trying… see the… the whole approach of the intellect is
go for the fruit, goal-oriented.
No, not the fruit, the root
you nurture the root, fruit will happen.
Fruit is a consequence.
You are shooting for the consequence without being interested in the cause. (Laughs)
That’s not going to produce long-term results.
Then this is what you will end up with
something that will work short-term and then that itself becomes a huge problem.
Right now, healthcare system itself is a huge problem
The very fact that pharmaceutical industry is the second largest industry on the planet
speaks volumes about our health, isn’t it?
Tracey: Yes.
Sadhguru: People tell me,
I do not know the statistic.
These are all things which are, you know, being circulated on the internet and things like that.
They say almost thirty seven percent of the medicine,
all kinds of medicines manufactured in the world are consumed by Americans themselves.
Tracy: Uh-huh
Sadhguru: They don’t even account for a miniscule of the population
and if they’re consuming thirty seven percent,
either they are paranoid about their health or really they are unhealthy.
One of these things must be true, isn’t it?
So we need to look at this.
If you want this to enter the medical school,
one simple way is if the medical school can start in some way,
we can… we can prescribe a method with which first,
one who wants to touch somebody else’s body
should make some effort to know about his own.
Something very simple… need not be
like you are not going to spend twelve years in meditation.
I am… I am sure that’s not practical for you
but I am saying at least twelve days.
Twelve days everybody can give, isn’t it
totally focused on the inward,
happenings of what’s happening?
I can do a simple experiment for you.
Are you okay?
Tracey: Yes.
Sadhguru: If I treat you as a subject and experiment? (Laughter)
See, just the hands, okay?
Keep all the five fingers together.
Place it gently upon your thigh.
with your eyes closed, you will inhale and exhale slightly deeper than normal.
All of you, most of you are medical professionals,
so you know much more about these things than me.
But I want you to just notice how the air fills up into your lungs or in other words,
where is the maximum expansion and contraction?
As you are doing this, I will say ‘switch.’
When I say ‘switch,’ without breaking the rhythm of your breathing,
just turn this hands over.
For those of you who cannot see, I’m raising this.
You don’t have to raise this. Upon your thigh,
just turn your hand over and continue to breathe.
And once again when I say switch, get back.
In these two conditions of the hand or the positions of the hand,
something about your breath will change. I want you to notice what it is.
If you want to notice it, the… what is needed is -
your spine should be erect, eyes should be closed,
and you must be focused on the breath. If you do these three things,
you will distinctly notice this.
All the five fingers should be together.
Just breathe slightly deeper than normal, inhalation-exhalation
slightly deeper than normal,
all five fingers together.
switch
switch again
please open your eyes
You notice some difference?
What is it?
If you hold it this (Gestures) way, the maximum expansion and contraction happens in the
happens in the lower lobe of the lung.
So you will notice it in the diaphragm region.
If you turn it around, it moves to the middle lobe of the lung, you’ll notice it higher up.
Just take one breath and see, it is noticeable.
Sadhguru: Is it so?
So something so simple,
most human beings will not take these things into account.
So just if you turn your hand around,
the very way you breathe alters itself.
It’s not just the breath.
The very way, the fundamental life energies function in this body alters itself simply
because you turned your hand around.
How many times in a day unconsciously are you doing this? (Gestures)
And hoping to be peaceful, it doesn’t work like that.
This is like you got into a car, you don’t know what these three pedals are,
just kick any one of them whenever you feel like it, you know,
what a jerky driver you will be? (Laughter)
That’s what has happened to human beings.
It is not that people do not know peace, health, love, joy,
they know all these things but it’s jerky;
it’s not sustainable, isn’t it?
If you did not know a moment of peace or joy, you would be on the suicide list.
You know peace, you know love, only problem is you can’t hold onto it, isn’t it?
That’s because this is a chemical soup.
If I give the same ingredients to all of you,
soup ingredients to all of you, and each one of you make the soup,
you will have still hundred varieties of soups, isn’t it?
The same ingredients, yes or no?
Each home it tastes different.
Just the way you make it.
This (Gestures) also is the same thing - same ingredients,
just the way you make it within yourself, isn’t it? (Laughs)
Whether it’s health or well-being, peace, love, joy, ecstasy,
every human experience has a chemical basis to it
and chemistry is not a basis.
Chemistry is also a consequence of a different dimension of who you are.
I think Mitch was putting up those five koshas and all.
In yoga, because you are talking about the mind
in yoga, we don’t see anything as mind.
All different levels of bodies -
physical body, mental body, energy body, etheric body
and the other one will not translate well,
it’s called bliss body in English but that’s a wrong translation. (Laughs)
So, physical body is something that you gather
because of the food that you have eaten.
So what kind of food you have eaten definitely interpret(s) itself
as the nature of the body that you have.
Well, your genetics,
the other information has a serious impact
but still… the design of this building is important
but still the material is also important, isn’t it?
Even if the design is fabulous,
if the material is bad, still the whole building may not fall down on our heads
but panels could be falling on our heads.
So, this is happening.
We are… we are not considering what we eat
as to what is the best thing for this body,
so food.
The next thing is mental body.
There is a whole intelligence,
there is a network of intelligence across this.
When we say mind, what are we referring to?
A certain level of memory and
a certain level of ability to use that memory in the form of intelligence, isn’t it?
You tell me if you being
all of you being doctors, you know this very well.
A single cell what it is doing, it can freak your mind. (Tracey Laughs)
It is doing that many things, isn’t it?
Tracey: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Then (There’s?) no question about that.
And your single cell what it remembers,
it can freak your mind once again.
See, do you remember ten generations ago, how your grandmother looked?
Tracey: No.
Sadhguru: No, you have no memory of that.
Your body remembers.
Your grandmother's nose is still sitting on your face
because your body remembers.
How your forefathers looked a million years ago, it still remembers, isn’t it?
So now if I have to speak,
I… I am sitting like this because
I have no such thing as thought in my mind;
it’s very difficult for you to understand,
it’s… that’s why they diagnosed me as dead. (Laughter)
Because I think with my body,
I function with my body,
not just with one part.
So whole process of life is right now being subjected to thought
and people are stressful because
what should happen on different levels of your system
is all being done in one place.
If it’s all done in one place,
just living
most people are only taking care of their survival,
earning a living, reproducing, and dying one day.
For that, they freaked out.
They are not handling (Laughs) some galaxies,
just their lives. (Laughter)
Vinita Bali: So Sadhguru, you’ve talked about well-being,
I’ve… You know, one of the things that you say is,
it’s all about how the body, mind, emotions and most importantly, energy come together
and I think you’ve said it very eloquently,
which says you know, when the body is feeling pleasant, we call it health,
if it is feeling very pleasant, we call it pleasure
and so on and you go on to say
Sadhguru: You can… You can go all the way.
Vinita Bali: Sorry?
Sadhguru: You can go all the way.
Vinita Bali: I can go all the way (Sadhguru Laughs)?
So, when the mind is feeling pleasant, we call it joy,
when it is feeling very pleasant, we call it peace.
When the, you know, when the emotion is feeling pleasant, we call it love,
when it is feeling very pass… pleasant, we call it compassion.
When the energy is feeling pleasant, we call it bliss
and when it is very pleasant, we call it ecstasy.
Sadhguru: You’re a very good student (Applause)!
Vinita Bali: So… So, here is the question.
Can you just elaborate on what you really mean?
What is the difference between bliss and ecstasy?
You know for
for people who are not mystics,
what does
what does it look like?
Sadhguru: I think I need to clarify this accusation of being a mystic (Laughter).
On a certain day,
two cows were grazing on the English meadow,
English cows.
Vinita Bali: Got it (Laughter).
The Thomas Hardy kind.
Sadhguru: One cow said to the other,
“What is your opinion about the mad cow disease?”
The other one said,
“I don’t care a hoot, I’m anyway a helicopter” (Laughter).
So, what a mystic means is
that there is no mistake about his perception as to who he is (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Okay (Laughs).
Sadhguru: So, there are only two kinds of people
mystics and mistakes (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: That’s an easy one to remember.
Sadhguru: So, a mystic did not fall from somewhere else,
strived to pay attention to simple aspects of life,
very simple things.
Very simple things means extremely simple things.
Just… Right now,
how do you know that you are here?
What is the basis, I’m asking?
Vinita Bali: I am talking with you.
Sadhguru: Even when you’re not speaking, you still know that you are here, right?
Vinita Bali: Yeah.
Sadhguru: So, how do you know?
Vinita Bali: I’m perceiving
Sadhguru: What?
Vinita Bali: …that I am in this place,
there is an audience here,
we are in conversation
Sadhguru: No, even if you close your eyes, you are still here, right?
Vinita Bali: …I have a mindfulness,
I’m attentive to the fact that I’m in conversation,
I’m conscious
Sadhguru: You are conscious?
Vinita Bali: I’m conscious.
Sadhguru: The reason that you know that you are here is because you’re conscious.
How do you know that you have a body?
Vinita Bali: Because I can move my hand (Laughter).
Sadhguru: So many things can move.
Vinita Bali: But I am causing my hand to move.
Sadhguru: Fine, even if you don’t move, you know it’s there, right?
How do you know?
Because there is sensation in the body, right?
Vinita Bali: Yeah, yeah.
Sadhguru: If no sensation in your body, you wouldn’t know whether it’s here or not.
No consciousness, you wouldn’t know whether you are here or not.
Vinita Bali: Right.
Sadhguru: Yes?
Vinita Bali: Yeah.
Sadhguru: So, these are s… taken for granted things.
If you pay little attention to these things,
you will see there’s a whole world out there,
there’s a whole existence by itself.
Just your sensation, if you pay enough attention,
you know the nature of your physical existence.
If you pay attention to what you’re calling as my consciousness,
you know the nature of … your basic existence.
Once you know the nature of your existence,
that is when you can use this (Referring to oneself) gadget well.
I’m calling this (Referring to oneself) a gadget
because human mechanism is the most sophisticated mechanism on the planet.
We are on top of the evolutionary heap, not for nothing.
It’s taken millions of years to manufacture you.
Yes?
Vinita Bali: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Not… Not a simple process.
An enormous process has happened to get you to this level of neurological sensitivity,
sensations, awareness, everything.
So, these are the keys of your existence
but everybody is reading a book orl
they’re looking into… they’re looking at the cosmos through their iPhone.
Nobody is paying attention (Laughs) to this (Referring to oneself)
because this (Referring to oneself) is the basis of your existence.
Only if you know this (Referring to oneself), you can employ this (Referring to oneself) to its fullest capability.
Even if you take your cell phone, the more you know about it,
the better you can use it, isn’t it?
The same with this (Referring to oneself).
So, what this whole unnecessarily exaggerated
exaggeration is not the word
unnecessarily decorated thing about self-realization means is,
you know more about this (Referring to oneself)
or you know everything that’s worth knowing about this (Referring to oneself).
That means you can use this (Referring to oneself) whichever way you want.
If you want to sit still here for the rest of your life, you can sit.
If you want to jump out and be active, you can do.
If you want to do this and that together, you can do.
Whatever you want, you can do because you know the mechanism fully, in its entirety,
not just the physicality of it, but its entirety.
So, if you know this (Referring to oneself),
suppose your body happens as per your instruction,
your mind happens as per your instruction,
your life energies happen as per your instruction,
how will you keep it
pleasant or unpleasant?
Vinita Bali: Pleasant.
Sadhguru: Pleasant. At least for yourself, highest level of pleasantness.
What you want for your neighbor may be debatable (Laughter)
but what you want for yourself is clear.
So, when you main… When you want pleasantness,
now generally, if you are very pleasant, we say you are blissful.
Now bliss can get boring sometimes,
okay (Laughs)?
Yes?
Vinita Bali: Good to know that.
Sadhguru: Pleasantness gets boring, isn’t it, sometimes?
You want some slosh to happen.
Now you use ecstasy (Laughs).
But that slosh cannot be kept up.
Bliss can be kept for your entire life.
Ecstasy cannot be kept for your entire life.
You go up and you come down or in other words,
bliss is a sustainable level of pleasantness,
the height of pleasantness.
Ecstasy is not sustainable but you can hit it often enough.
At least a few times in a day, you must hit it.

Namaskaram Submarine [I]
Just want to know
the basic difference of
the way of Shiva and the way of Buddha
It's very easy to talk about buddhist way
Because it's very logical
It's quite simple actually
and
It's very long drawn-out process
Generally the methods that gautama gave to people were always a question of a few lifetimes
You can clearly see this today
The buddhists are always talking about this
particularly the Tibetan buddhist
who are the
[best-known], but this in the world today for [whatever] political reasons
They're always talking about a few lifetimes of work
So if you have that kind of patience that you're willing to work for a few lifetimes
Got the [mas] ways are very efficient very logical scientific
Step-By-step process that one can take because this is a part of awareness
the significance of walking the path of awareness is
There are milestones on the way, which tell you you'll come one mile two miles 10 miles it tells you where you are
That is the most important aspect that
Is without too much trust or devotion you can still grow?
Because you have a method to hang on to you just keep doing it keep doing it keep doing it
It clearly shows you that you're progressing
But with Shiva there is no such guarantee
and
He doesn't fix milestones. You [don't] know whether you're going forward or backward
But you're going somewhere. That's all you know
It's like falling into your bottomless pit that
sounds terrifying [I]
want you to understand this a bottomless pit is the safest place [to] fall into a
pit with the bottom is Dangerous a
Bottomless pit pit is absolutely safe
Your life is done if you just jump into it. It's done. Simply you fall
If you ever do has anybody done skydiving you?
[did]
so
if you have a free fall
Then if you do not open your parachute for a few thousand feet
You don't know whether you're going down or going up nothing it just feels like you're floating around
And it's wonderful only when you look down the [dam]. Planet is coming at your [to] tremendous speed
If this planet is taken off, this is a great experience
Only if you look down, it's just coming at your tremendous speed. That's the only problem
Falling is don't understand the falling as a negative thing falling is a great thing did you ever fall in love?
Only when you hit the bottom then it gets bad
If you fell into your bottomless pit, and there is no problem
So Shiva is a bottomless pit
His methods are [very] different
but you cannot limit him that way because
with seven different
disciples the seven
Subtly she's the celebrated Rishi's of the [or]
He thought seven basic ways
In which a human being can explore his consciousness
from these seven in multiples of seven it went further and
112 different ways he explored and he said this is all
Just a beautiful story
no time for stories
so
He expounded
112 different ways as to how a human being can attain to his peak
and
These 112 are the 112 Chakras in the body?
There are 114, but two of them are outside the physical body he left those two and he said
112 different ways of attaining
when you're embodied
that means
Every Chakra in the body every meeting point of the energy system
one particular way of attaining
So he did not leave anything out so [buddha] is a small part of his work I
Want you to understand?
Gautama himself
Didn't go simply sit in the forest
The eight years of his sadhana. He spent with various teachers across the country and
The whole spine of this spiritual process this knowledge has essentially come from Shiva
variabilities whichever part of the world it is the basic spiritual process comes from this spine and
it's been taken to different parts of the world in so many different forms it they look so [different] because
These 112 different ways look absolutely different from one another
So what is the difference between Shiva and Buddha is not an appropriate question?
Which aspect of Shiva did buddha explore?
He explored the path of awareness, which [is] one aspect
It's very you need ina dimensional, but the significance of Gotham Buddha is he is very scientific clinical?
He appeals to the logical mind
But he is like
He also said like this
Many times he was an ascetic. He just sat unmoving
But many times he was a mad dancing drunk
He was in all kinds of States
Because he didn't limit himself to any particular dimension. He just explored every aspect of life
So what you call as buddhist way. He's just one aspect of this 112 different ways and
So many others have brought so many other aspects, but individual ways
Of the seven disciples of the seven subtly she's the one who walks out
[south] means anything south of himalayas is out. I
Am talking to all the Mumbai people food
Anything south of himalayas is sound so a guest here walks out
And he became particularly active
Beyond
the Vindhya mountains you know that story about vindhya mountains bow bobbing down to agastya money, and he never came back, so
you know the story, so
[you] [must] learn something about India
So particularly the Deccan plateau
He spread himself in such a way every human habitation in Deccan Plateau he touched
wherever you see you will hear something about auguste, [Emoney] and
He started this action for rural rejuvenation
He did not leave a single human habitation
He brought spiritual process to everybody's life the whole population
They say he lived over four thousand years
We don't know how long he lived, but definitely his lifespan was not a normal span of life
It was extraordinarily long when you just calculate
the mileage that he covered if you had put a speedometer on him and
Seen how many miles he covered you?
[could] see it's an extraordinary length of time
We don't know whether it's four hundred years or four thousand years people say it's four thousand
but definitely he lived very long and
He touched every habitation and made sure a spiritual process became a living reality for them
We are still enjoying his work. I want you to know
The Southern part of India is still enjoying his work a certain without knowing why a certain level of settled nature
That you see is his work
Because he brought yoga into people's lives
without a label
without a format
Just like life process as you wake up in the morning brush your teeth cook eat
all this he made it into a spiritual process and
We are still enjoying the benefits of that
If you look at any spiritual process anywhere on the planet
you will see it is not outside, the
112 ways in Which You explore this
So comparing gautama and Shiva is inappropriate I
Have great respect for gautama
He's a great being no question his work is phenomenal. He caused a huge spiritual wave
Which is still on after 2,500 years?
But it is not comparable
It is no way comparable
All we can say is
Shiva's work Contains
Gothamist work as a small element it is
less than 1% because out of 112
[Gautam] I explore one
and
The important thing is he marketed it well, and he encouraged thousands of people to take the path. That's his success
But she was little too integrated to do marketing
You should do marketing for him he is
He won't do marketing
But still I have to
Generally, it's believed. This is somewhere 40 to 60 thousand years ago that. He started his work
But after sixty thousand years or [40] thousand years it is still alive, you can't kill it
You still can't kill it isn't it?
By the time I am done with my life. I'm sure I will leave him little more popular than the way he is today
you
(Sadhguru): The ancient temples in India,
if you are really talking about ancient temples,
yes,
the temples were built to a certain science called Agama.
You have heard of Agama?
There are five basic parameters
with which the temple was built.
If the temple is built according to that –
the size and shape of the temple,
the size and shape of the parikrama,
the size and shape of the garbhagraha or the sanctum,
the size and shape of the idol,
the Mudra that the idol holds,
the mantras that are used to consecrate this
if all these things are properly matched
it will create a tremendous field of energy.
You need to understand Indian temple is not a place of prayer.
There is nobody leading a prayer in the Indian temple.
The Hindu temples, there is nobody to lead your prayer.
You go there and do what you want.
Nobody telling you,
‘You must sit down and pray and do this or that.’
Though now you started the request chit.
Paying five rupees and telling God
what he should do, you started that recently.
Otherwise your culture told you,
if you go to the temple, they did not even tell,
‘you must pray,’
but they told you,
‘You must sit there for some time.’ Is that so?
Still exists in South India;
in North it is gone.
In South India, still families are aware that
if you go to the temple, you must sit there for a while.
Now you just touch your bottom, and go away.
Touch your bottom to the floor and go away.
Or you sit there and discuss your neighbor
or the cinema or something else.
The idea was if there is a strong field of energy,
you simply sit there quietly and imbibe this.
So, the culture told you,
‘First thing in the morning
you have a shower, go sit in the temple, then go out and do… do your business.’
Because once you step into the world,
whatever kind of transaction you do,
‘my profit is your loss, your loss is my profit,’
this is how it is, isn’t it?
Yes?
Every transaction is like this. Isn’t it so?
So when you transact like this,
you tend to get worked up
because somewhere you’re losing,
somewhere you’re gaining.
One day, may… losses may be more than the gains.
It is not just in terms of money;
in every relationship transaction also there is loss and gain. Isn’t it so?
Yes?
So you could get worked up.
So morning you go and imbibe this and go into the world,
so that you pass through the world smoothly.
At the same time,
it was also said people on the spiritual path need not go to the temple.
Nowhere else in the world such wisdom exists.
Do you know this?
People on the spiritual path need not go to the temple.
The Indian temple does not look forward to people on the spiritual path
because they have their own self charging methods.
This is a public charging place.
Public battery charging place is what a temple is;
now you invented your own self charging method,
no need to go to the public place.
You are from Tiripur?
No.
So if you live in Tiripur,
you have to go to the public tap to get your water. (Laughs)
Now you got your own tap in the house,
now you are not going to go and stand in the queue there, isn’t it?
That’s all the difference is.
That’s a very wise way of conducting things.
But now you’re building the temples
just the way you’re building your shopping complexes,
probably for the same purpose.
That is a different game all together.
About the lingas in the temple
just some time ago,
usually I don’t go to the temples unless they are of architectural importance.
I never go to the temple
because I have nothing to seek in a temple.
I got self charging systems.
There is nothing that temple can add to me in any way, so I don’t go.
I don’t even go to this one.
I just created it for people.
Once in a way, when something is happening, I go;
otherwise I don’t.
So,
sometime ago when I was in Himalayas,
I just went to this Uttarkashi temple.
Oh my God! This lingam, you must see.
It is bursting with energy.
Two thousand two hundred and fifty years old.
It is like it was done yesterday.
It is bursting with energy.
You must just go there and see.
Just the presence is so fantastic.
Dhyanalinga is also like that
but that is unidimensional linga,
so it is more aggressive.
This happens in subtle way
because it’s multidimensional.
It is much more subtle
but there it is very very unidimensional and strong
Speaker: So we have understood that you're so blissful by just seeing you and hearing you talk,
but going through the history we find it so rare.
Why is it so rare that we get enlightened people?
Sadhguru: It is not rare,
it is just that lot of them were not famous, that’s all.
They just quietly lived blissfully, it's not rare.
There's substantial history in this country
where every generation saw any number of enlightened beings in the past.
Today it is rare because
See, suppose you
you went to just the outskirts of Chennai hundred years ago,
it would be rare to find a person who can read a Tamil letter,
forget about an English letter.
Yes?
If you walked into a village you had to search the whole village
to get one man who can read a Tamil script;
local language, not even a foreign language.
Today if you go there,
almost hundred percent everybody can read Tamil,
at least sixty percent I believe;
at least fifty percent can read English language.
Yes?
Why did this happen?
Because there's infrastructure, isn't it?
There's infrastructure of education, so it happened.
And fortunately in the past there was phenomenal infrastructure in this country for inner well-being.
This is the only society which built a lot of infrastructure for inner well-being,
but today there's very little infrastructure.
So this is one of the commitments that we have for the world,
that we want to build infrastructure where it's purely for inner well-being of the human being.
Because there is no infrastructure for human consciousness;
that’s the reason why it's not happening.
Here and there one man could read in the past
why?
Because there was no infrastructure.
If that man has to go to school he has to travel hundred kilometers, so he did not go.
That whole village did not go, only one guy went somehow.
So the same now –
if you have to know something about yourself you have to go to Velliangiri Hills,
Isha Yoga Center;
you never made it, isn't it?
Participant: I went.
Sadhguru: You went, oh. You're those ardent ones. (Laughter)
So I'm saying if there was that kind of infrastructure in every street.
In every street there was infrastructure for inner well-being,
beyond faith, beyond religion, beyond denominations,
just as
as there is a milk booth, do you understand?
As there is a milk booth,
as there's a public tap
I won’t talk about toilets, there aren’t any. (Laughs)
So as there is a milk booth, as there is a public tap,
as if you want a auto rickshaw it is there.
Just like that, if you want to turn inward there must be infrastructure in the society, isn't it?
If there is no infrastructure
how will you produce those people?
You will not produce them.
That’s what is missing.
We need to put that back.

Shekhar: Sadhguru, I am going to push with this, if I may.
I am going to replace the word ‘creativity’ with the word ‘transmit’, right?
So let’s talk about transmission, right?
How do I transmit?
Is there a relationship between transmission and Bhairavi?
Do I
Do I become part of or access the source?
Because to transmit I have to become like
like a pass… a source through which it is transmitted.
So how do I do that then, if I have to transmit?
Even if along the way I do a little bit of clever interpretation of it?
Sadhguru: She herself is a transmission.
When I say “she herself is a transmission” –
we’ve always used the word ‘window’ in yoga.
Somehow Bill Gates stole it from us (Laughter),
because we didn’t make it as popular as he did (Laughs).
So window has always been a term
where the whole thing is about opening a new window.
If you open a new window,
suddenly the Existence looks completely different.
Right now suppose this is your home –
if you open this window you see the temple,
you think this is how the world is.
Suppose this is the… You have lived in this contraption of a home,
you open this window, then you think, “Wow! The world is a temple.”
You open this window, you think the world is a mountain.
You open that window, you think it’s a jungle.
You open that window and you think it’s a town.
Like this you can open a million windows
and still it’ll be new because the phenomenon of Creation is such.
So she herself is just a window.
Anything can be made into a window.
Every wall you can crack into a window,
but it’s not been done.
So an established window is made
where more people are able to see,
because it’s kept open.
By themselves they would never be able to experience these things.
But now through Bhairavi people are able to experience things, know things,
achieve things
which they would have never done by themselves.
A whole lot of people right now, who have
who are everyday in the Bhairavi sadhana through the Bhairavi yantra,
you should listen to the stories –
incredible!
I will tell you about a particular person.
This couple just came to the ashram with one of their friends.
I didn’t even know they were here.
They had not done the program.
They just came because some friend was coming,
they came.
They came from Singapore.
They walked into the temple and in both their eyes, tears came.
They didn’t know why.
They’re not very religious kind or anything.
They’re very modern couple.
So both of them came,
they took the yantra home.
Their lives changed.
They’re very successful people.
But it… His whole business and… That’s his creativity.
He created a new business.
He… he is not like a second generation or something,
he is first generation and he did not start very beginning.
He was in the armed forces and somewhere along the way
he kind of took a voluntary retirement and started business,
and built it very big – international, you know,
a really… a few hundred million dollar business he built
and this accelerated like anything.
He is suddenly able to communicate with people,
do things with people and the business expanded in a big way.
Why I am saying this is for him that’s his creativity –
business is his creativity.
And suddenly there’s a new capability which he had never thought possible.
If you use her as a window,
suddenly she opens up a new dimension for you,
an enhanced level of competence.
Shekhar: So this couple that came to the Bhairavi temple,
came because here’s a possibility
and maybe I have one other that I don’t know is, they were here because they were supposed to be here,
they were here by chance, they were asking a question –
I’m not saying they answered or got an answer or an intellectual answer.
When they walked into the temple, am I… I’m trying to understand,
did… was there a question in their mind that got
and so maybe answered is the wrong word –
but the window opened and gave them an experience that destroyed the question,
answered the question?
What happened?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) This is a tough guy, okay?
He is an ex-army guy and tough guy.
So for him without any reason, when he walked in tears came –
he doesn’t know what it is,
but he knows something opened up.
Someone who’s never shed tears for anything and does not want to,
when he just walks into a place,
just a building and just tears came,
in his understanding something opened up and he is right.
Something opened up.
So that opening is a big experience and above all,
you realise that in so many ways as you progress –
socially you progress,
in your business you progress and whatever else, socially other things add up –
in this you’re tightening the circle,
you’re closing it up.
So he suddenly realised “Something opened up which I had never thought possible.
I never even sought it nor did I care for it.”
But for every intelligent human being,
whether he is conscious about it or not conscious about it or for every human being –
why should I make somebody intelligent, somebody not so intelligent –
because everybody is able to breathe and get oxygen out of air,
so they’re intelligent enough,
the life is intelligent enough.
Whether he is intellectually enough… is enough or not is a questionable thing
but intelligent enough, life is intelligent enough,
that’s why it’s existing, that’s a complex form of life.
So for every human being, this is the thing –
have you opened up to the various dimensions of life
or have you cocooned yourself in your own petty creation,
which is psychological?
(Sadhguru): In this culture
we have never had one authority to spread spiritual process
because this is the only culture on the planet
without a religion of its own. (Laughs)
So Hindu is essentially that culture which was born out of the river Indus, is called Hindu.
So it’s a geographical and cultural identity,
never was a religious identity.
It’s only when people came from outside,
who came with concretized ideas of religion,
they had to give you also one name.
‘So we are this, what are you?’
‘We are all over the place.’ (Few laugh)
They couldn’t understand that,
‘You must be something.’
In the same place, a million things existed together.
In the same house,
if you are a family of five,
five of you can worship five different gods
and have absolutely no problem about it. (Laughs)
We didn’t even think it’s a problem,
till people came from outside and told you
‘our god’ and ‘your god’ –
till then we did not even think it’s a problem.
You could be worshipping this god right here,
I could be worshipping that god right there,
another could be sitting with eyes closed,
another could be singing,
another could be dancing but we still thought it’s all okay,
everybody can do their thing.
So, there has never been a religion in this land.
We have thirty three million gods and goddesses
that happened when our population was thirty three million. (Laughter)
Now we are 1.2 billion but we lost our creativity. (Laughter)
Yes.
Because outside forces came,
particularly western forces came and they started making a feel...
making us feel ashamed of our gods.
Too many gods! (In mocking voice)
‘There’s only one god,’
as if it’s a superior idea.
If you can create one, why can’t you create a million?
You have not seen your one God, right?
If you can create one, why can’t you create a million or a billion?
It's just a question of creativity, isn’t it?
So does it mean to say ‘nothing beyond me exists?’
That would be a stupid way to conclude.
As you sit here, you know you did not create yourself.
Yes or no?
Can you digest your food or digestion happens?
It happens.
Are you breathing or breathing happening?
Are you beating your heart or is it beating?
I can go on to your liver and kidney and everything, even to the spleen.
Even the tiniest thing in your body you are not running it, isn’t it?
It is happening.
Are you spinning the planet or is it spinning by itself?
You’re doing nothing.
Doing nothing, just tit-bits;
everything vital is just being done.
Yes or no?
Everything that’s vital to life is being done.
You just have to sit here and just enjoy the spin; (Laughter)
for that, how many problems! (Laughs)
So,
this is a land which clearly understood
God is our making;
that’s the reason why in this culture God is not the goal,
mukti is the goal,
liberation is the goal,
ultimate freedom is the goal,
God is never the goal.
Yes or no?
You don’t like it?
Because you’ve forgotten; otherwise mukti is the goal, isn’t it?
Mukti means what?
Liberation – freedom from everything, including God. (Laughter)
You are using God as a stepping stone if you need it.
You can grow with God or without God.
This is the only culture on the planet
where in any of our Indian languages,
there is no word for a heretic
because we never thought anybody is a heretic.
We never imagined that there can be somebody like that.
Because we did not have any established belief systems,
everybody can do their own thing;
most plural and democratic process for thousands of years.
So, the spiritual movements were started for human liberation.
This is not about God.
Nobody in the planet,
no human being is interested in God, please understand this.
People are interested in God
because they believe he is a solution for their life, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
You think if you go to God all your problems will go away,
your health problem will go away,
your mental problem will go away,
wife and husband problem will go away,
you... you can pass an examination without studying, (Laughter)
you can...
you can succeed in business without working, so many things,
incredible things
but it’s about you, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
It’s about you.
So when it’s about you,
we were straight forward enough to address it straight.
We said this is about our liberation,
this is about our wellbeing,
this is about our ultimate wellbeing, not just immediate well-being.
So, this is a culture which looked at it this way,
so it is a complex array of spiritual movements.
Many have died unfortunately.
In the yogic system it says,
when… when somebody asked Adiyogi,
‘How many paths can be there,’
he says if you use your system and go,
there are only one hundred and twelve
but if you go beyond your system,
how many atoms are there in the universe,
that many doorways are there.
So we gave the freedom to create your own god.
There is something called as Ishta Devata,
you can choose your god.
If you don’t like any, you can create one.
Yes.
You suddenly like the tree in your house,
you can start worshipping;
nobody in this country will think it's funny or weird.
Anywhere else if you do it, you will be...
they would be burnt alive
but now they would throw stones at them across the fence
because they think you are a heretic,
you are worshipping a tree.
You like a stone in your garden, you can start worshipping that;
nobody thinks anything odd about it;
it’s perfectly fine
because there is not a single atom in the existence without the hand of the Creator in it.
Every cell in your body is doing complex activity not because of you, isn’t it?
The source of creation is functioning through that.
Every atom, all this complex movement of proton, neutron electron happening -
you doing it?
The hand of the Creator is very much in it.
So every atom is a doorway to the beyond.
Because of this,
so many varieties of spiritual movements happened.
It’s unfortunate,
so many have died in the last hundred years,
so many,
but still the variety is fantastic.
If you
how many of you have been to place... places like Kumbh Mel and things like that?
Have you been to Kumbh Mela?
The big one that happened in Allahabad, have you been to that?
Hundred and... After hundred and forty four years it comes.
If you go and see there
You must go
you will see India. Okay?
An India of another dimension,
which today the educated population of the country are completely missing.
It’s incredible, incredible, I’m telling you.
People are putting their last penny
and traveling from somewhere just to be there for two days and go.
I’m saying it's that level of people
where hundred rupees would mean like what a million would mean to you,
that’s how much a hundred rupees will mean
That kind of people, putting everything that they have,
they come with their families just to be there
because somebody has told them on that day if you take a dip you will attain mukti,
not that you will see God,
not that God will come and give you a heap of gold.
You will attain mukti.
Still eight hundred million people in this country are actively seeking liberation,
knowingly or unknowingly.
It’s an incredible thing,
nowhere else on the planet there is such a phenomena happening
that there are human beings longing to go beyond their present level of existence,
consciously.
Nowhere else such a thing has happened.
When Mark Twain visited India,
he spent two and half to three months in India.
There is a book about his travels along the equator;
he travelled around the world.
So, he said,
‘Anything that can ever be done, either by man or god has been done in this land.’
This is one of the best compliments India has ever received.
And that is so.
In terms of understanding the mechanics of how a human being is made
and what we can do about this,
nowhere else has anybody looked at it with the profoundness
that it has been looked at it in this culture,
nowhere else.
I am not saying this being biased that I am born in India,
so I have to ‘boo, boo, boo.’
This is not about you being Indian or not Indian,
this is about a profoundness of knowledge which is gone awry, you know,
lost its tracks or losing its track slowly.
Unless we put it back on the right thing,
humanity will lose something tremendous
because today we know how to call on the phone and talk to somebody in America,
but we do not know how to communicate with this one (Referring to oneself) yet.
Our communication technology,
information technology has hit the ceiling
but what information do you have about the nature of your own existence?
Nothing.
We know how to do many things.
We can go to the moon but you don’t know how to simply be here.
So, this technology of inner well-being has been explored with as, you know,
absolute profoundness.
This knowledge should not be lost.
Only if this knowledge flourishes on this planet,
material and economic well-being will translate into human well-being;
otherwise you will have everything and you will have nothing.
Just to give you an example what’s happening to India right now.
In the last year 2011,
when the Diwali came,
we call it Deepavali.
When the Deepavali came in South India,
about 127 crores worth of alcohol was sold on one day in Tamil Nadu.
Out of this,
twenty one crores worth of alcohol was sold in one small town
where a population is about six to 6.5 lakh people.
Why means –
this is the Tirupur town.
You’ve heard of Tirupur?
It’s a hosiery town.
It’s an export-oriented town.
Everybody here, their incomes are at least three times that of everybody else in the state.
So if money comes,
they are going to get drunk and stay in the gutter.
Forty two percent of the Tamil Nadu’s population is going diabetic.
So if money comes, you will buy disease.
So if economic well-being does not translate into human well-being, it’s meaningless.
Moving from poverty to affluence is a hard journey.
Whether it's for an individual or a society or a nation,
it is a hard, uphill task.
After you get there,
the deception of it -
you work hard all your life and get there
and all you get is a disease,
all you get is addictions,
all you get is misery,
all you get is broken minds,
all you get is stress,
it is a great deception.
So when people achieve economic well-being,
human well-being also should happen.
If this has to happen, without an element of spiritual dimension in them,
it cannot happen.
They may be following an organized spiritual process
or by themselves they might have found something
but without an element of spiritual process,
there is no way
anybody can translate economic well-being into human well-being.
This must happen
as economic development happens,
it is very important parallely
spiritual possibilities are widely available to every human being;
otherwise life will deceive you in such a bitter way.

Sadhguru: Just got to be introduced, that’s all. (Laughter)
You’re paying too much attention to everything around you,
not enough attention to this one. (Gestures)
But the quality of your life is essentially determined by
how you carry this one.
Yes or no?
This moment,
what kind of clothes you’re wearing,
what kind of car you parked outside,
what kind of home you live in
does not determine the quality of your life.
This moment how joyful are you feeling within yourself,
determines the quality of your life; isn’t it so?
Nothing has been done about it.
You think it will happen in consequence
and you’re setting impossible goals for your happiness.
‘If I have to be happy,
my wife should be like this,
my hus… husband should be like that,
my children should be like this,
the world should become some other way.’
Well,
these are impossible conditions you’re setting
for your happiness and peacefulness.
Now that you have compromised yourself to peace -
why I am saying compromised yourself to peace is
because lot of people have given up aspirations for being ecstatic or blissful.
‘If I am just peaceful, it’s enough’.
Even the so-called spiritual leaders are going about and saying peace is the highest goal in your life.
Peace is not the highest goal in your life.
If you want to enjoy your lunch today,
you must be peaceful - yes or no?
If you are not even peaceful,
there is nothing in your life that you can do in a worthwhile way.
To be peaceful essentially means this,
that you’re not messing your mind.
To be peaceful, means
that your system is at ease.
You know how to conduct your mind;
you know how to conduct your emotions, your body and your energies.
You are peaceful.
It is not a rocket technology;
it is the most basic thing.
You have a dog at home. You give him his food, he sits peacefully
maybe not ecstatic but peacefully.
Many times they are ecstatic also. (Laughter)
Yes?
If your dog is able to sit peacefully
Oh! he doesn’t have to run my industry.
That’s not the point;
he has got his own stuff going. (Laughter)
See, it has nothing to do with the external activity that you’re doing.
It’s got something to do with the internal systems
as to how they’re functioning.
Essentially it means either
neither your body, nor your mind, nor your chemistry,
nor your emotions, nor your energy are taking instructions from you.
They’re doing their own thing.
Once your machine is not in your control,
being peaceful is impossible.
I’ll tell you, you get into your car
and now you go there and you want to turn this way
you do this to the steering, it goes this way (Gestures)
can you peacefully drive this car?
Can you?
No.
Anxiety is natural, isn’t it?
This is what has happened to your vehicle.
It’s out of control,
you never done anything to find out
where the steering wheel is first of all. (Laughs)
This is not that simple as a car.
This is a super, super computer.
Now the problem is most people have not even bothered to find the keyboard.
They think if they do this, somehow it will work. (Laughter)
If you
when you’re given such a highly sophisticated machine,
if you do not conduct it properly,
it will cause many problems to you.
By accident, it’s working.
I want you to know this; this is made this way.
If you hold your hands like this, it will breathe one way;
if you just turn it around, the very way you breathe,
the breathing pattern itself changes in your lungs.
You can try it if you want when you have the time.
This way
this way. (Turns his palm face up and down)
I am saying everything that you do,
fundamental changes are happening in this machine
because it is such a sophisticated machine.
It’s more than a touch screen.
If you just wish it, it will happen.
When you have such a sensitive and sophisticated machine,
and you’re operating like a blacksmith,
then being peaceful seems to be difficult.
Peace is not the highest goal in your life.
It is the most fundamental requirement.
Don’t ever set peace as the highest goal.
If you do that, you will only rest in peace. (Gestures)(Laughter)
You must see,
to be peaceful is the first thing in your life, isn’t it?
If you want to do anything sensibly in your life -
if you want to do
conduct any situation in your life sensibly,
to be peaceful and happy is fundamental.
Such a fundamental thing is rising to heavens these days.
People think they’re going to be peaceful somewhere else, not here,
because you’ve never paid attention to this machine.
Never paid attention to the internal mechanism of how a human being functions,
what is the basis of everything that’s happening within you.
It takes a little bit of attention,
that’s why our basic program is called as ‘Inner Engineering’.
We have engineered the whole world the way we want it;
much comfort and convenience has come,
but well being has not come, isn’t it?
Because well-being will not come.
Well being will come only when this (Referring to oneself) is engineered the way you want it,
only then you’ll know well being.
(Sadhguru) I think it was Hemingway who said this.
He visited certain parts of India,
he visited the wrong places
and he saw certain people and went back
and then he said,
“If you don’t eat well,
if you are not dressed well,
if you don’t live well
you must be spiritual.” (Laughter)
How is that!
But at the same time
another very prominent American
who is still seen as one of the keenest minds
that America ever produced,
Mark Twain
you read some Mark Twain here?
Hmm?
Mark Twain came visiting India
because he was so fascinated with Indian mysticism.
He found the right kind of guide
who took him around and he met many people
and when he was leaving,
he said, “Anything that can ever be done either by man or God
has been done in this land.”
So, both have happened;
the peaks have happened
and the most horrible depths have happened.
It… the question is just this
are you going to be the peak
or are you going to be the bottom?
That’s an individual choice
but now making the choice,
“What do I do,
where do I go?” -
they are making this more and more complex
and more and more deceptive.
Now, if someone is going to tell you
that your dead father is in the highest heaven
it's very satisfying.
Hmm?
Isn’t it so?
And if someone is willing to tell you
your mother-in-law is in hell… (Laughter)
See....
If somebody is going to tell you,
you yourself are going straight to heaven
it is even more reassuring
but is that
are you in such a childish state of mind
that this is all you are seeking?
Some idiot who does not know where he is going
is going to tell you where you are going. (Laughter)
Is that all you are looking for?
So, this is a decision you have to make,
“Am I looking for solace
or am I looking for a solution?”
If you are looking for solution
then it's a different game.
If you are looking for solace it's a different game.
Solace is just cheap psychiatry,
you know.
“Don’t worry, everything will be okay;
don’t worry, everything will be okay.
God is just keeping his lap open just for you.
If you die you are going to land straight in his lap.” (Laughter)
See if you are going to land in God’s lap
I don’t think you should postpone it for tomorrow. (Laughter)
No?
Isn’t it?
If you are going to land in such a blessed place
you should not postpone it for a moment.
This is okay for somebody else,
not for you, isn't it?
It’s all right to tell this to somebody,
not for yourself;
it doesn’t work.
Isn't it so?
Yes,
but something that doesn’t work
we have peddled for too long.
So what really works has been lost in this confusion.
The only thing that you have to work with right now is
your body and your mind.
These are the only two things you have.
“No, my soul.”
You can't work with it,
nobody ever worked with the soul.
You can only use your body;
you can only use your mind, isn't it?
These two things,
if you bring it
and make them into conducive vehicles
then something beyond becomes a living possibility,
not because you believe in it,
not because it's written in your great scripture,
not because somebody that you think is a great Guru said that,
simply because you have found a way
to go beyond the limitations of your body and your mind,
that's all.
Otherwise no way… no other way it's going to happen.
I did everything for the wrong reasons
but I did the right things, so it works.
So, I want you to know it is not the intention,
it is the nature of action which yields the result, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Even for the wrong reasons if you do the right things,
right things will happen to you.
That is how the damn existence is structured, what to do?
That is why good people are always suffering. (Laughter)
People who believe they are good
they are always suffering because
they have great intentions but stupid actions,
so they suffer. (Laughter)
So, this is
this whole idea of right and wrong,
good and bad is all human nonsense.
Existence is not human centric.
They have always told you
many religions of the world have been going about telling people
“You are made in God’s own image”
and
once you are in God’s own image
naturally the place that you live
this planet is the very center of the universe
they believe this for a long time isn't it?
Even now they are insisting
You’ve heard of this guy Copernicus?
Copernicus was one of the first guys
who came and said,
“Earth is not the center of the universe;
not only not the center of the universe,
it is not even the center of the solar system.”
And he promptly died.
That’s not bad thing; it's a good thing
because the next man after him,
when he uttered the same thing
they wanted to peal his skin off
and the skin would not cooperate.
So, they decided to burn him alive.
The next significant man who has uttered the same thing was Galileo;
he said the same thing.
Then they got ready with the skin peelers.
Then he said, “No, no, no, no;
earth is the center of the universe and the cosmos.
What is my problem? (Laughter)
As you say earth is not only the center of the solar system
and not only the center of the universe;
it is the very center of the cosmos.
Anyway I do not know what is the center of the cosmos,
you want to assume.
I want to save my skin. That much I know.” (Laughs)
So, today science has proved to you
that definitely earth is not the center of the solar system,
in the universe you are just a miniscule.
Tomorrow morning if you and your planet disappears,
if it evaporates
nobody is going to miss it.
Hmm?
The whole solar system evaporates tomorrow morning
it will be just a small vacant place
that nobody is going to miss in the existence,
nothing is going to happen.
Yes?
God won't come rescuing you.
It’ll just pooff it will go.
This is a good thing.
This whole idea that I am made in the image of God
has left man so crude
and he has been walking upon this planet so wantonly
without any concern for any other life on this planet,
simply because he believes he is in the image of God.
If you knew that your life is as significant
or as insignificant as that of an ant
it is actually.
All these grand ideas that human beings have about themselves
that we are made in the image of God
and God loves us and
These are dangerous ideas
which has made human beings so uncaring,
unresponsive to life around him.
He thinks this planet and universe is all made for him,
no other life has any right to live here except him.
He just lost… all his marbles in his head are gone
simply because of these kind of ideas.
Now, modern science sort of has been very bad for your ego.
Now it says you are just a blob of nothing,
pulsating like this right now tomorrow pooff
really.
See, whatever you think about yourself
are you breathing everyone? (Laughter)
Is everybody breathing?
Meditators: Yes
Sadhguru: No yogis.
Nobody is able to hold their breath and sit.
Inhalation,
exhalation,
inhalation,
exhalation,
inhalation,
exhalation… (Says in a stretching tone) (Laughter)
The next inhalation didn’t happen… (Gestures)
wherever we search you don’t exist.
Yes or no? Tch
See, how fragile it is.
Just breathe carefully, it may go away. (Laughter)
It's like a balloon - in and out,
in and out,
out and it didn’t go in again
pooff
gone!
That fragile;
at the same time how sturdy!
Hmm?
Isn’t it so?
How many things a man can do
but at the same time how fragile!
It doesn’t take an elephant to kill you,
a damn virus… (Laughter)
so
without knowing the essential nature of life
we are trying to somehow blunder through,
that’s the whole problem.
Now how to exist here?
Today how to live?
How to make this life in such a way
that it is conducive to know,
experience and manifest
deeper dimensions of life
as a way of living?
if you want to receive the deeper dimensions of life,
if you have to become conducive,
if your mind and your body and your energies have to become conducive
to receive something beyond what you are right now,
first and foremost thing is
they must listen to you.
They must take instructions from you.
If your body,
if your mind,
if your energies took instructions from you,
would you naturally keep it in utmost pleasantness?
Yes or no?
You would.
So, if you keep this continuously pleasant,
if you keep this constantly pleasant
then your intelligence will flower to a
completely different dimension of perception.
When you are no more a issue
when you are no more a issue by yourself,
there are million issues on the outside
but you are not the issue,
you are just fine -
if you become like this you become receptive.
So, always the yogic systems have been talking about blissfulness,
ecstasy,
ananda,
you know all this stuff
not because blissfulness is a goal by itself.
It is only in a state of pleasantness
this will be at the highest level of receptivity,
otherwise when this is a… in turmoil,
when this is an issue by itself
it cannot receive;
it cannot understand the core of life the way it is.
It can only fight for survival.
Sadhguru: Turn around once.
Just turn around.
Just turn around, turn around.
See, all of you see what's written on his T shirt.
‘A’,
yeah – that’s where you start,
‘A.’ (Applause)
Don’t start with Z,
you must start with A.
A means it's the beginning, isn't it?
So where should you start?
Does it happen in stages?
Where should you start?
I think we have been repeatedly saying
you can only start from where you are,
you cannot start somewhere else.
Don’t try to start anywhere;
there is nothing to start.
It's already… long ago it's been started.
You are trying to just hasten it, that's all.
You can't start it, it's already started.
Your longing to grow has started, isn't it?
Maybe you’re thinking of more money but that’s only your misunderstanding,
but essentially you want to be something more
that’s a spiritual process;
misguided but a spiritual process.
You want to become powerful,
you want to become rich,
you want to become knowledgeable,
you want to be loved,
you want to have pleasure –
all this is spiritual processes going in wrong directions, that's all.
Unconscious conducting of
you’re unconsciously conducting a spiritual process.
If you conduct anything unconsciously,
you may flounder every step maybe off the mark, isn't it?
If you walk
Now if I tell you drive home with your eyes closed,
before you get out of the parking lot
you will be in quite a bit of mess, isn't it?
So now don’t try to start anywhere,
just become more and more conscious.
As you become more conscious it will naturally find its way.
To be conscious, to be aware, what it means?
If you try to be aware, you cannot be aware.
People are always mistaking mental alertness for awareness.
Mental alertness will enhance your ability to survive better.
You can survive better with mental alertness
but that is not awareness.
Awareness means
right now are you here, right now?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Do you know that you are here?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: That’s awareness.
You’re aware, that’s why you know that you are here,
otherwise you would not know.
Suppose you
you do not know that you are here, isn't it?
If somebody (Gestures), you know.
So someone is dead, poke (Gestures), no awareness;
somebody is asleep, poke (Gestures) - immediately there.
Now you don’t have to be poked, still you are there.
So what I am saying is your awareness anyway is coming in different stages.
Have you noticed at different times of the day you are in different levels of awareness?
Hmm?
So it can be heightened.
What is needed for survival naturally happens.
Even when it comes to survival mode,
not every individual is alert to the same extent.
Now you are driving on the street,
not everybody is alert to the same extent;
it's a survival process - driving,
but not everybody is alert to the same extent.
So even in the survival mode not everybody is alert to the same extent
and that can be heightened.
If you heighten this awareness continuously,
a point will come it's
where it's no more about survival;
something that is not needed for your survival will also come into your awareness.
When that comes into your awareness –
that which is not needed for your survival is bound to be a dimension beyond the physical.
So when that comes into your living experience of life,
you’re on,
very simple.
Those seven days,
what we were doing with you is slowly wind you up,
wind you up, wind you up in such a way
that you become more and more aware.
Suddenly after 5-6 days, you are like. (Gestures)
After that if you kept up your practice,
gradually it’ll move up every day,
otherwise slowly you became dim once again.
Have you noticed this?
You steadily keep up your practice, how your awareness is;
you give it up and slowly voltage is going down.
If voltage goes down, the light becomes dim.
If light becomes dim, you see very few things.
The voltage is really high, light becomes really bright and you see everything.
This is awareness.
So you don’t work on your awareness or your consciousness or your spiritual growth,
you just work upon your voltage.
You keep your energies up as much as possible
and when energies are up
you tend to get entangled with something.
You make sure you don’t get entangled with anything.
See, an adolescent is far more energetic than other people,
but he is always getting into trouble because he has the energy,
but he doesn’t have the stability.
So to have the energy and to maintain the stability,
if you do this
these two things if you do,
rest will happen by itself,
nothing to do.
Simply sit and enjoy.
Sadhguru: what is a chant?
Why a chant?
A chant means it's a certain clever arrangement of sounds.
The meaning itself doesn’t matter.
We give it in such a way that the meaning also enhances
because after all you have a mind and emotion,
which is also a major part of you.
If you were all energy, if you were just energy,
your mind and emotion was completely kept aside,
there would be no issue at all,
I would just take you on an express highway.
But you have a mind and emotion which is as dominant
or more dominant than the energy actually,
so meaning also matters to you.
If I just make a clever arrangement of sounds
which is actually a beautiful chant but in meaning it means
that you are fool and God is a fool and everybody is a fool. (Meditators Laugh)
Suppose it means like this,
even though the chant works on the energy level,
mentally, emotionally you will develop resistance towards this.
‘What am I saying?’ Isn't it?
So you also want a pleasant meaning attached,
a meaningful meaning attached.
It is needed.
For you no, because you anyway don't understand the chant. (Meditators Laugh)
That’s the advantage of not knowing the language, (Laughs)
otherwise people would also like the meaning also
to enhance their mind and emotion.
If they are willing to keep the meaning aside
we could arrange various sounds like this.
Let's first explore the meaning,
because exploring the sound would take a practical session,
not talking.
Brahmananda Swaroopa means,
Swaroopa means the image or a reflection of that
image of that rather.
Brahmananda means ultimate joy or ultimate bliss.
So this is the image of ultimate blissfulness.
Isha means boundless,
I mean, Isha means that which rules.
Jagadisha means, it’s like enforcing that, saying that.
Jaga means existence,
again Isha means, Jaga-disha means, the one who rules the existence is ultimate blissfulness,
that’s what it is saying.
The same thing is said in a different way.
Akhilananda Swaroopa means,
Akhila means everything,
all inclusiveness is Akhila.
That which is everything, he is the image of that, is Mahesha.
Mahesha again means an auspicious ruler
which is the same thing or it is also,
Shiva is also referred to as Mahesha.
So you must understand this,
this is a tradition which is not,
which is not a his-story,
which is a her-story, (Meditators Laugh) ok?
This is not a tradition of history.
We are not looking at these things,
‘Oh you called… oh you said Mahesha, are you talking about Shiva?’
That’s not how it is.
Anything auspicious in the world,
all those names we will give to Shiva.
Shiva has a million names
and we say ultimately he is nothing.
Because he is nothing we can call him anything we please.
If he was something we could have only called him one thing.
Because he’s nothing we can call him whatever we want.
Everything that we like we call as Shiva.
Shiva is called as what, Bhairava, means he’s very fierce one.
Shiva is called as Sundaramurthy,
that means he is the most beautiful one.
Shiva is called as Bhuteshwara which means he is the master of the five elements
or another meaning is he is the hideous one.
So like this it goes on.
Shiva is called the most intelligent;
Shiva is called the most simple and innocent.
He is called Bholenath.
So whatever we like,
every name you can attach to him because he’s a nobody,
he’s nothing.
Because he is nothing we can call him whatever we want.
So in this context the mantra is just that.
The meaning-wise it is just saying
it is ultimate ecstasy or ultimate blissfulness
which is the Lord of the existence.
That which rules the existence is ultimate ecstasy.
So this particular thing,
this particular chant that we did,
we have consecrated it.
You utter this and see what it does.
Has anybody done it for a certain period of time by yourself?
Anyone?
What does it do?
Meditator: It makes me happy.
Sadhguru: Hum?
Meditator: It makes me joyous.
Sadhguru: It is supposed to take you towards ultimate blissfulness.
You can just use this as your Sadhana.
24 hours if you can chant that’s your Sadhana.
It’ll take you there.
Nothing else, simply chant.
It will just take you there
because the sound is consecrated,
it is energized, it’s alive,
it’s not just sound.
If from nadha to nadha yoga that’s the difference,
you can consecrate the sounds.
As you consecrate objects, you consecrate spaces,
you consecrate certain sounds.
The moment you utter the sound it creates
a completely new reverberation altogether.
Shekhar:In the way that we’ve become,
are we destined to or condemned to
in the society we live in –
in the urban society that we live in,
are we condemned to the search for the maximum potential life
or somebody that can lead us to that idea,
just the fundamental idea of the maximum,
the full potential of life as you call it?
Why are we condemned to that?
Was it at some time very different?
Why should we, in a modern or this society be like that?
Sadhguru: There were many societies.
This culture used to be like that.
You know the history of this country.
About 6-8,000 years ago,
when the Aryan invasion happened first,
people who built Harappa &amp; Mohenjo Daro obviously had sophisticated minds, okay?
But I am sure you also read this in your text book
when you read high school –
the British wrote these text books and they said,
‘Harappa &amp; Mohenjo Daro had very organised drainage systems.
You’re only interested in how they handled their poo and pee.
Is that all that mattered to you,
because you had such bad drainage systems in your own place,
that’s all you could think of?
Why didn’t you think
about six thousand years ago
if people had to build such sophisticated places
and large temples and things,
what were they made of?
What was their intelligence?
What was their thought?
What was their consciousness?
What were they thinking about
or what was their state of experience of life,
that they were so content
they built wonderful cities
and had no armies to protect themselves?
That means what was the consciousness of the people there?
How did they live?
No,
they had drainage systems.
This is what you read in your text book.
I also read the same nonsense in the text book.
So why is it that we are discounting human experience
and paying so much attention to the roads that we’ve built
and drainages that we’ve built?
Yes, those things are needed,
but for what?
To make… enhance human experience, isn’t it,
of this life?
No, right now that’s completely gone.
Nobody’s talking about enhancing human experience.
How to expand… enhance human experience means
be plugged in
and look at everything through your phone.
It’s just dazzling you
but it’s not enhancing your experience in any way.
It’s numbing your senses, that’s all.
It’s numbing your instruments of perception;
it’s not enhancing your experience in any way.
Shekhar: So why are we going that way?
Sadhguru: Because everybody is getting educated.
Till this generation there was no right to education.
If a man just wanted to graze his cattle and walk around,
he could do it.
If he just wanted to run around in the mountains, he could do it.
Not anymore.
Today every human being on this planet
must belong to some nation;
he can’t just be somewhere
on such a big planet.
Till about hundred years ago,
more than sixty percent of the people
did not belong to any nation,
they just lived.
Now, you must belong to a nation.
If you must belong to a nation,
you are surging a… serving a large society
to keep the national interest going.
No, why can’t people just live?
No, nobody can live by himself.
we are… we are sub-serving the human life
and making something else more important.
No.
The only and only purpose of life is
for this piece of life to find its ultimate possibility.
Whether you’re an earthworm
or a grasshopper
or a bird
or an animal
or a tree
or a human being,
this is the only purpose every life has,
that it wants to grow to its full potential,
not be something else.
Maybe you look at this tree and think,
‘Oh, I can take the flowers and do pooja.’
Or you look at that tree and think
‘Oh, this will make good furniture’
but the tree is not thinking about furniture,
it just wants to grow to its full size and full possibility, isn’t it?
You may have ideas of furniture.
Similarly, if I look at you
your father looks at you and think
‘what is he going to become?’
He may have ideas.
No, this life has no such ideas.
This life just wants to become its fullest possibility.
That possibility unfortunately has very, very
very, very narrow windows in the world.
Here and there;
rest is all making you a cog in the wheel, you know.
[Questioner] How do you measure, …one measures their own spiritual progress at individual level?
[Sadhguru] Oh, you want a meter? Oh, we’ll give you a meter.
Don’t worry about your spiritual progress.
There is no such thing as spiritual progress.
Are you becoming more available to it, that's all the question is.
Let's not talk about something which is not in your experience
because if I talk about something which is not yet in your experience
there are only two options - either to believe me or disbelieve me, isn't it?
Believing doesn’t get you any closer, disbelieving doesn’t get you any closer.
So let's talk about something that is in our experience.
What condition, what state of mind, emotion, body and let's leave the energy
because that’s not in your – experience. What condition of your body, mind
and emotion makes you more available to life than the way you are right now?
You tell me? If you are sad, do you become more available?
If you are tense do you become more available? If you are peaceful do you become
more available? If you are blissful do you become more available?
In which condition would you become more available to the life process?
If you are in utmost pleasantness you become more and more available
to everything around you. Isn't it so?
Right now you are feeling very happy, this one comes and asks some stupid question,
you are okay with her. That one comes and asks something else,
you are okay with her also. This one comes and asks something,
you are okay with that also. You are in a certain state of unpleasantness,
you are irritated, frustrated, angry, depressed about something,
this one comes and even tries to say something nice to you, poofff, this’ll go.
Yes or no? Even to simple aspects of life you are more available
only when you’re in a certain state of pleasantness, isn't it?
So let's measure by that standard. If by the day if you are becoming
a more joyful human being - you just keep accounts of this on a daily basis,
‘From yesterday to today, am I little more joyful?’
If you’re keeping accounts and if you are becoming more and more joyful
by the day and your face, instead of becoming like this, is… slowly is
becoming like this, that means you’re progressing.
Yes, you are definitely progressing; because spirituality is not some nonsense up there,
it is about becoming available to life process in its fullest possibility,
not just to the physicality, not just to the mentality,
to becoming available to life process in its fullest scope – this is spirituality.
(Sadhguru): Shiva is not a philosopher,
he’s a yogi.
When I say he is not a philosopher…,
see it’s very easy to be philosophical.
In fact,
the less you know,
the more the chances that you will become philosophical.
It’s very easy to become a philosopher.
You just have to read a couple of books and misunderstand them,
you can become a philosopher. (Laughs)
The reason why you’re talking about something that is written in a book
is because you have not perceived,
grasped life in any depth.
If you had even read a single page of this vast existence,
all your life you would be talking only that.
There wouldn’t be time to talk about anything else.
So Shiva is a yogi,
purely existential,
not philosophical,
not intellectual.
This is not something that you can understand.
This is not something that you have to be convinced about.
This is not something that you have to agree with.
This is something that you learn to relate with.
If you can relate to it and experiment with it,
it will do miraculous things for you.
Questioner: Pranam Sadhguru.
What is the importance of naming a baby
based on the time of birth and place of birth?
Sadhguru: The Sanskrit alphabet comes from a certain understanding of creation itself,
because the language was not created for communication.
The language is not a made-up language for the sake of communication.
It is a language that people deducted from the existence.
It is a language that evolved out of observation not out of imagination.
In many ways the sounds that you utter,
and the forms that you use these sounds to refer to, are connected.
This is what a mantra means.
A mantra means a sound,
a pure sound.
A yantra means a corresponding form.
To understand this,
if you know something about physics,
at least in high school if you studied physics,
you definitely… has at least a chapter,
two pages on sound.
If you feed a sound into an oscilloscope,
a sound measuring instrument,
depending upon its frequency, amplitude and other dimensions of the sound,
it will give out a specific form every time.
So a sound has a form attached to it.
Similarly a form has a sound attached to it.
Now when a child is born,
depending upon the geometric situation of the solar system
there is also a way of considering the larger universe but that is too complex –
at least considering the geometric situation in the solar system,
people decide that this sound would be best
for somebody who is born at this time on this day.
This has a certain scientific basis but there is a certain leeway
because Sanskrit alphabet has fifty-four alphabets.
These alphabets can be broken into a few hundred minor sounds.
It’s very complex to name people through those minor sounds.
When it comes to renaming them
in case they take brahmacharya or sanyas,
when we are renaming them we take little more care
not by birth but by looking at certain aspects of who they are,
and how they take to the initiation,
accordingly we will adjust the name so that
that name or that sound will match that,
not the meaning.
Meaning is irrelevant because meaning you can make it up.
Now we must name your child in such a way
that every time you call that name,
something within him should loosen up.
But if you name him Anirudh
he will go either outside the country
or even in the country now
if you go to Bangalore - they will call you Andy, (Laughter) okay? (Laughs)
If you name him as Janak, they will call Jack. (Laughter)
So we don’t know how they’re going to rename him.
It will happen.
It is important to a certain extent.
If you are in pursuit of liberation,
the name that you utter
the sound that you utter becomes important.
Because in Indian societies
a lot more care was taken to name the male child
rather than the female child
because - not because… this is not a sexist bias –
because you have to live with that guy. (Laughter)
The girl is somebody’s problem. (Laughter)
Because he is going to be around till you die.
Now when you are dying,
if you want to call your son, you call him Shiva - tch,
nice.
If he is Sam, what to do? (Laughter)
So the parents are concerned,
we will be going on
because he himself may not use his own name often
but we will have to utter this name again and again;
what works for the geometry of the family.
With a girl they don’t know what to name her
because they do not still know who she will marry.
So usually when the girl got married
they used to change the name at the wedding.
You know this?
Till about twenty-five years ago for most women they changed the names at the wedding
looking at the husband’s name,
looking at the characteristics of his whatever,
celestial geometry they would change the name to suit.
Now that is considered derogatory.
“Why should I change my name?”
Not necessary.
Because this has come
because everything has become exploitative,
because of that resistance will come for everything.
If it is conducted in a proper manner everybody would accept.
When it’s not conducted in a fair and proper manner
then it becomes a problem.
So always naming the male child was an important process
because you have to live with that fellow.
He will not… these days they go away, it’s okay (Laughter)
but at that time they would be with you till you die.
So it was important that the name that you utter
fits into the geometric equation within the family. (Laughs)
There is common sense,
there is sense
and there is something beyond sense.
With common sense,
your survival process gets handled.
You don’t have to be brilliant,
you just have common sense,
you will survive pretty good.
You could turn out quite street smart.
Actually, if somebody very intelligent is walking down the street
Let’s say Albert Einstein is walking down the street.
A street urchin can easily con him.
Albert Einstein doesn’t have
the wily nature (Laughs) of the one who is walking the streets every day.
Very easily, you can deceive him.
He may have enormous intelligence about something else.
So, because the street kid has more common sense
Common sense is restricted to a certain habitat.
In that habitat, it works.
In another place, your common sense doesn’t work.
You know, you heard of the ISRO?
They have sent a Mars probe now at ten percent of the cost what NASA would do normally
because it’s all indigenous and they built it up in their own ways.
So, they were interviewing people to be taken in,
for a job in ISRO.
Shankaran Pillai applied (Laughter).
So, he is very street smart, a lot of common sense.
So the interviewer asked,
“Which is closer, moon or Mumbai” (Laughter)?
They were in Bangalore.
Shankaran Pillai looked up in the sky
and he said, “Moon” (Few laugh).
He said, “What?
How do you say that?”
He said, “Well, I can see the moon, I can’t see Mumbai” (Laughter/Applause).
So, this kind of sense goes well in certain things.
But if you want to transcend,
you need a different kind of sense.
This kind of sense is good on the survival mode.
When you are on a survival mode on the street,
this kind of sense works pretty good.
If we try to go all over with this kind of sense,
we’ll become one big mess.
So going beyond one’s senses and knowing,
why is it needed?
It’s not needed if you’re thinking in terms of a need.
If you are using the word need as
whether it’s necessary for my survival or not, it’s not needed.
But unfortunately
If you… If you had come here (Laughter) as a chimpanzee,
it’s definitely not needed.
But your tragedy is you have evolved into a human being.
Wanting to live like a chimpanzee doesn’t work,
that’s the whole problem.
Human intelligence and awareness has come to a place,
where it cannot limit itself to the ambit of survival,
it has to look.
Now what we’re doing as a solution for this problem
It's not a problem, it’s a possibility.
Every possibility, those who are not willing to take on the possibility,
for them it seems like a problem.
It’s a phenomenal possibility
but most human beings are treating it like a problem.
So how they are solving the problem is,
raise the bar of survival.
Keep on raising it.
what was your idea of survival twenty-five years ago,
what was your idea of survival fifteen years ago,
what is your idea of survival today,
it’s raising the bar, isn't it?
Two meals a day was survival when you didn’t have anything,
if you… if you have known that… such a state.
It’s good to know those things.
But now, maybe Mercedes is survival (Few laugh).
In every different segment of society,
survival has been raised to a place,
where billionaires are still struggling to survive among their community (Few laugh).
Yes.
I have had this opportunity (Laughs), at close quarters,
to see multi-billionaires are still beggars (Few laugh).
Every day, their… their mentality, their mindset is just that of a beggar,
who sits on the street and thinking,
“Okay, what will… what is today?
What… How many more pennies can I gather?”
It’s the same stuff.
It’s just that the numbers have increased
but the experience of life is still the same
because you raised the bar of survival.
Now, your whole life, it doesn’t matter what you do,
still goes in survival.
Everybody
I… I won’t fix this for you.
In your life, you must fix it.
How much is survival, you must fix it somewhere,
now.
Not after twenty-five years,
when you get there.
No.
Now you must fix,
“This is my survival. Then what I want to do?
My survival is taken care of, what is it that really matters to me in my life,
whatever that is?”
If we don’t structure our lives like this,
forever you will be fighting with phantoms.
Why (Laughs) I am saying you’re fighting with phantoms is
See, in other countries, where the bar of survival has not been raised so high,
people can change the course of their life when they wish.
I find,
in the most affluent nation on the planet,
everybody is enslaved for thirty years minimum.
Their house loan is for thirty years,
car loan is for five years,
another thing is something,
their insurance, this, this, this.
They’re just fixed.
Tomorrow morning, if they find something really compelling that they want to do,
they cannot do.
They can only do it after thirty years (Few laugh).
We did not come to affluence for this.
The idea of affluence is, you have the freedom to change the course of your life,
do what you want to do.
You don’t have to be stuck with what you thought was the best thing when you were twenty.
At twenty, you may think this is the best thing.
At forty, the damn thing means nothing (Few laugh).
If still the same… same things mean a lot to you,
that means you’re stuck.
You’re not growing, isn't it (Laughs)?
A whole lot of people are stuck at fourteen, not even twenty (Laughter).
Same things, still they are excited about somebody’s body part (Few laugh),
they are still very excited about
It’s ridiculous (Laughter).
When you are fourteen, you were excited, I understand (Laughter).
You are forty-five, fifty, sixty, you are still in the same bin (Laughs),
it’s a tragic way to live
because essence of life is that we are able to explore as much as we can when we live here,
to know and experience everything possible that is there in this life
that is there in this life (Referring to oneself).
Kiran Bedi: Let’s come to the opportunities.
We’ve addressed strengths,
we’ve addressed weaknesses.
What are the opportunities the nation has today in nation building with 1.2 billion people?
Sadhguru: See, India is a
this …this nation is a tremendous opportunity,
a possibility.
This is something that anybody who looks at this nation with… closely enough can clearly see here,
rest of the world clearly sees that,
that this is a nation of tremendous possibility.
But what we need to understand is
between a possibility and a reality there is a distance.
Do you have the courage, the commitment and the conviction to walk the distance?
That’s always the question.
Definitely it's a great possibility.
We are sitting on the threshold
but do not underestimate our ability to goof things up”
I am not being pessimistic,
I am the last person to be pessimistic about anything
but I know our ability to goof things.
I see it every day.
The way they drive on the street,
the way they do things,
the way everything is made
we have a phenomenal ability to goof up things because
we are too much genius with very little organization.”
Yes, everybody thinks he is a genius.
If you go, sit in a teashop in a street-side,
in a …rural India –
no, no, no I am not talking politics –
if you sit in a teashop in somewhere rural India street-side
because I’ve driven across the country. I’ve sat in dhabas and teashops so much,
I’ve ridden …I’ve crisscrossed India on my motorcycle
so I lived in dhabas and teashops all the time
So you will see the guy who is making the tea there
he will be telling how Tendulkar should have made the right shot
you know how he tch,
you know how his technique is not good,
he is doing a wrong approach.
Kiran Bedi: Or Bishan Bedi is sitting here, how he could have bowled.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Whatever, this kind of things.
He will be talking about how the Prime Minister should have run the country differently.
Only problem with him is he does not know how to make good tea
So this is the problem, we are …we are too exuberant.
A society like this is generally considered a high context society
with too much context, not enough content.
It's a very beautiful way to exist on one level
but if we do not organize
if do not focus this natural exuberance of the people
a certain intelligence which is free-willing intelligence,
you will have a very …a chaotic situation
which seems to be going somewhere but not going anywhere.
It's like whirlwind making its own rounds.
So it needs a little forceful engagement of pushing it in a certain direction,
a little authority to push it.
People don’t understand what powers India.
It’s powered by itself, it's just like a whirlwind
but you must be able to direct it in the direction that you want it to go.
That needs a little bit of authority
but we picked up all kinds of fancy ideas,
we don’t like authority, you know
we don’t like any kind of authority.
We would like to go all over the place.
Just see …just the driving on the street is a clear demo.
I am not talking about authoritarianism
but a certain authority which organizes this whirlwind of chaos
is needed for this country to push it in one direction,
otherwise we will keep going round and round.
We come… see, we’ve been sitting on a threshold.
For me the economic development that everybody is talking about,
I am not thinking about how you can transform your life from Maruti to Mercedes
that doesn’t matter to me. I am not against cars, I like them (Laughs)
but that is not the thing.
There are over six hundred million people.
Today night, after this is over when we go wherever we go,
the table at which we sit
there will be a choice of dinner that you and me can choose.
There are six hundred million people who have no such choice tonight.
The child who has to go to school tomorrow,
he is not eating what is necessary for him to go and remember who is Mahatma Gandhi’s wife,
he doesn’t care a damn because he has not eaten right.
The woman who carries a child in her womb doesn’t have the necessary nourishment
to bring out something that’s worthwhile.
Now this can change in next five to eight years’ time,
if we handle things right and it matters that we handle this right.
Kiran Bedi: See, you really combined the opportunity with the threat
because the same population,
the same energy is goofed up as you said.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Kiran Bedi: Could be a threat?
Is there any threat other than this?
Sadhguru: See, this is the biggest threat for India.
This also happened in the Economic Forum
our people particularly the corporate and also the ministers were,
you know everywhere you hear this – I think everybody is repeating this chant
“We are the youngest nation in the world, we are the youngest nation in the world.”
I sat through this and I was amazed
why everybody is gloating about we are the youngest nation.
So I asked them “What happened to the old people?”
They said, “What? No, no we are the youngest nation.”
I said, “That’s okay but what happened to the old people?”
I want you to know India
in India nobody gets old, people die young.
That’s why we are the youngest nation in the world
Yes.
It is a tragedy that we don’t have old people
but this tragedy can be turned into a tremendous possibility right now
because compared to the rest of the world we are a youthful nation.
We have the opportunity to power ourselves into well-being.
But we must understand why we are the youngest nation.
Suppose we are saying right now sixty percent of the population is below thirty and we are very proud,
tomorrow you find sixty percent of the population is below fifteen,
something wrong has happened or no?
Why are we not looking at it?
We’ve not run it properly.
Why don’t we see people are not growing old,
people are not living,
my great grandmother lived to be hundred and thirteen.
Nobody is living like that.
Everybody is dying in their fifties and sixties or even less.
So we are
we have the synergy of youth right now
though our poets are eulogizing many things about the country,
I want you to understand, for 1.25 billion people,
you neither have the land
nor mountains
nor forests
nor rivers
nor even a piece of sky for 1.25 billion people.
If all of them have to live in decent housing, almost literally,
you know huge occupation will happen,
there’ll be nothing left.
Only reason why we seem to be managing is
because they’re living like cattle packed up - in one room twelve people are sleeping.
We’re managing.
If every one of them has to have a decent bedroom you won’t have place.
So, only thing that you have is people.
If you have this population educated, focused, balanced and inspired we are a miracle.
If you leave them uneducated, unfocused, uninspired, unskilled,
we are the biggest disaster waiting.
Kiran Bedi: Do we need money for this?
Sadhguru: We have the money.
We have the money.
We’ve not had a determined leadership.
What has been lacking is leadership.
Because… I’m not somebody who takes any political stance
but I’m just looking back,
I’m seeing
leave the first twenty-five years after independence,
they did whatever best they could do with little that they had and it’s a heady times, okay?
But after the passing of Jawaharlal Nehru, we’ve not really had a Prime Minister.
In the sense, somebody always becomes
except that Lal Bahadur Shastri for a short period
and maybe Narsimha Rao for a little period which was
government was tottering all the time –
rest of the time somebody becomes a Prime Minister only because somebody dies
and Indian emotion, like a cinema it overtakes everybody,
and somebody’s daughter,
somebody’s son,
somebody’s somebody becomes the Prime Minister.
We’ve never really had someone who has roots in the nation,
who knows what this country is
and who is burning with aspiration to make this nation something,
we’ve never had that.
It’s only by default that people have become Prime Ministers in this country.
Kiran Bedi: But don’t the leaders come from within the community,
within the people?
Sadhguru: No, no tch, I’m saying
Prime Ministers happened only because somebody died.
Kiran Bedi: But you also have certain states.
We’re talking about… even state governance,
we’re not only talking about central governance.
Sadhguru: Yes, but
Kiran Bedi: India has twenty-nine states today.
State governance.
Look what’s happening with Uttar Pradesh today.
Uttar Pradesh what is happening
it’s a leadership which was elected two and a half years ago with overwhelming acceptance.
What happened?
It comes from within.
What is the present state?
I’m not saying it’s gone wrong or right.
So aren’t people responsible for it?
Sadhguru: We are a democracy in paper.
But our mindset is essentially feudalistic.
Because even... I’m saying even among the elite and educated,
suppose you do well tomorrow,
suppose our present prime minister does really well tomorrow,
people will cry “I wish we had a son.” (Laughter)
You understand?
People will cry “We wish he had a son because when he goes,
his son could become the Prime Minister.”
I’m saying in our mindset we are still feudalistic.
So when you are feudalistic, things are run in a certain way.
What essentially it means is,
being feudalistic or democratic is,
feudalistic means who your father was matters;
democracy means I don’t care a damn who your father was.
I don’t want to know.
This is why I said Mahatma Gandhi’s wife, I don’t want to know who she is,
I don’t want to know who Mahatma Gandhi’s father is.
We bow down to him for who he is and that’s all that matters to us.
And that’s how it should be in a democratic nation. We care who you are,
we don’t care who your father was.
You may care who your father was,
I don’t care who your father was.
I only care who you are.
(Dr Sanjeev): And Sadhguru, in respect of the importance of breathing?
(Sadhguru): Oh, you must breathe, believe me!
What can I say?
If you turn on your TV,
there is ‘Zumba’ and there is ‘Insanity.’
Yes, it is insanity, I can understand.
You know this thing, what I am talking about?
These are all exercise systems today, going crazy,
viral on the televisions and other places.
In the yogic system,
we found out in what state of breathing,
the cellular rejuvenation happens at its highest.
If you breathe in a certain way,
your cellular rejuvenation will be highest.
I don’t know if I should
this is a quackery, a little bit of quackery,
but you know, about two years ago,
I happened to be in Germany.
This is a qualified doctor who has turned into alternative systems
and a… a friend took me there and
I just happened to go there and there was a big storm,
we couldn’t get away from him.
There was a snowstorm,
so I had to stay with him for the night
and he said he wants to check my cellular age.
I walked into his laboratory –
all kinds of weird machines and computers and stuff,
stacked-up computers.
I said, ‘I don’t want anything checked, I am fine.’
But he said,
‘No, no, we have to check you.’
And he checked, I don’t know what it is,
he took my blood samples, this, that and everything and
he put me on all kinds of machines and he said
my cellular age is twenty-five.
I said, ‘Well, I feel that way.
I don’t know about my cells.
At least I feel that way.’
And now, for example, the basic practice we’re teaching
as a part of Inner Engineering,
the Shambhavi Mahamudra
the University of California did a study,
an extensive study, on this
and they found, those who are doing Shambhavi
for more than three months,
the neuronal regeneration in the brain,
is two hundred and forty-one percent higher than the average.
It is the highest recorded ever.
Just because of a certain pattern of breathing.
So breath is life, isn’t it?
If I take away your breath, you’re finished.
Something so vital,
it is not just about breathing more oxygen.
There’s a lot more to it.
There’s a whole science attached to it.
It is... it’s very unfortunate,
these are things we have always known.
But,
the yoga,
even the yoga that you see in the country is rebound
from the American coast.
Lot of people believe Madonna invented yoga.
(Dr Sanjeev): We’ll let them believe that.
Sadhguru, you just referred to other dimensions of awareness.
We know our gross body a little bit, not a lot,
and there are subtle bodies,
which probably we also carry.
Do the subtle bodies or
whatever happens in those bodies impact the health of the physical body as well?
(Sadhguru): In the yogic system… I’m saying in the yogic system,
not in yoga - in yoga, there are more aspects to it –
in the system that’s been written down, we talk about five layers of body,
five sheaths of body.
These are called Annamaya Kosha,
Manomaya Kosha,
Pranamaya Kosha,
Vignanamaya Kosha,
Anandamaya Kosha.
‘Anna’ means the food that you’ve eaten.
The physical body that you carry is just a heap of food,
what you’ve eaten or it’s a piece of this planet.
It is taking on this kind of form,
because of a certain software which is already within you.
You can call it genetics,
you can call it karmic,
you can call it so many things but essentially, it’s information.
A certain memory shapes this particular body,
in a particular way.
Why eating the same potato,
your nose became like this and
somebody’s nose became like that is simply
because of the type of information
that’s embedded in that person.
Fortunately, if you eat a potato, you
your nose will not take that shape, you know, it’s a
it’s a good thing
because there’s other information
which is giving shape to these things.
So physical body is essentially an accumulation of food.
We… never refer to the mind as ‘mind.’
Yogic system has always looked at it, as a mental body,
because there is intelligence in every cell of your body.
There is memory in every cell of your body.
It is a combination of memory and intelligence which you’re referring
to as ‘my mind’, isn’t it?
Is there one cell in your body which can function without its own intelligence?
Is there one cell in your body which can function without memory?
We know today,
by checking the DNA of a person,
it’s absolutely unique;
there isn’t another one like that.
So there is information,
a very specific information concerned with that person.
Now, this information can be altered,
can be evolved,
can be made use of.
Information does not mean
it is a deciding factor.
Information means –
it is an enabling factor, isn’t it?
But because people have lost the ability to enable their information
into a new possibility, it has become a deciding factor now.
So whatever your genetics are,
whatever your karmic information is
this is information.
If you know how to use it,
it has a phenomenal possibility.
If you do not know how to use it,
it becomes a static cycle,
creating itself in a certain way.
So this is your hardware,
that is your software,
but these two things cannot do anything by themselves
unless you plug it into quality power.
So the third layer of the body is ‘Pranamaya Kosha.’
This is the energy body.
These three are physical in nature.
When I say, ‘physical in nature’,
it is very clear, that this light bulb is physical.
But the electricity behind it is also physical.
The light that is emanating from it is also physical.
It is getting subtle, but still physical.
So these three are physical in nature
the physical body,
the mental body
and the energy body - all three are physical in nature.
The fourth dimension is referred to as ‘Vignanamaya Kosha.’
I know the word ‘Vignan’ is being used very liberally today.
‘Vignan’ essentially comes from ‘vishesh gnan.’
‘Vishesh’ means – an extraordinary knowledge.
Knowledge that you can grasp through five senses,
is considered ordinary knowledge.
That which you cannot grasp through the five senses,
but has been grasped in some other way
is referred to as ‘vishesh gnan’,
which together becomes ‘Vignan.’
So this is ‘vigyanamayakosha.’
This is a transitory body.
Between the physical and the non-physical,
it is a body of transition.
The fifth one is a completely non-physical dimension.
This we call as ‘Anandamaya Kosha’,
which means bliss body.
This does not mean a bubble of bliss is sitting inside of you,
you know it is not. (Laughs)
It is just that it is non-physical in nature.
That which is not physical in nature,
you can neither define nor describe the nature of what it is,
because it’s not physical.
So we talk about it in terms of our experience.
Whenever we touch it,
we become blissful.
So we are calling it ‘bliss body.’
It’s like if somebody is sweet to you, you call them ‘Honey.’
This doesn’t mean they’re dripping.
Like that, we are calling this
non-physical dimension within us as bliss body.
That is not the nature of it,
but that is our experience of it.
Whenever we touch it, we become blissful,
so we are calling it ‘bliss body.’
The first three are physical.
If you bring sufficient balance into your pranamayakosha
or the energy body and keep it in full vibrance –
your physical body and psychological body or the mental body,
there can be no ill health in it.
I can show you hundreds and thousands of people,
who walked away from their chronic ailments simply
by bringing a certain balance to their inner system.
Because, you need to understand this,
there are two kind of ailments.
One is infectious in nature.
Infection means - it’s an invasion
from another organism.
That has to be battled, shot down, bombed,
chemical weapons, whatever… it’s all allowed.
But over seventy percent of the ailments that people suffer from are
chronic in nature.
Chronic ailment means - for some reason,
your own body is generating an ailment.
For some reason,
your body is not happy with you,
so bothering you.
From inside, an ailment is coming.
Every cell in the body is programmed
for health but it is creating disease.
This means there is a certain fundamental imbalance.
If you bring your energy body to full vibrance
and proper balance,
you will see your physical body and your mental structure will be perfectly healthy.
I can show this to you,
in terms of hundreds and thousands of people
who walked out of their ailments.
This is not a cure,
this is not a miracle,
this is just a re-alignment of your system.
Little
If you set it on a better platform,
it functions better.
(Questioner): Pranams Sadhguru. I get up at 6:00 AM
I am sorry?
I get up at 6:00 AM, hurry the cooking,
get the children ready, start by 8.30am to the office,
back from the office by 6.30, then freshening up the children, myself,
prayer, cook food, homework, sleep.
In this hectic schedule, where can I fit yoga in my life?
(Sadhguru): Now you get up at 6 o’clock,
and whatever time you go to bed.
You have a busy day.
Where is the time for yoga?
You have time to eat,
you have time to gossip,
you have time to work,
you have time to take care of everything,
but you have no time to take care of yourself.
That’s what you’re telling me.
Now this attitude is like you try to act like a martyr all the time.
I have no time for myself; I am giving myself totally to everybody.
What is it that you’re giving?
Your agitations, irritations, your anxieties,
passing it on to children, isn’t it?
If you’re really, really concerned about your children,
if you are truly concerned about your children,
creating a joyful and loving atmosphere for their growth is most important.
Not providing them shiny boots,
not providing them better clothes,
not providing them video games,
not providing them something else is important.
You creating an atmosphere of joy and love around them on a daily basis,
moment to moment,
is more important than all the nonsense that you’re providing.
Isn’t it so?
Isn’t it so?
Yes or no?
So what is your focus about life?
If you’re able to manage your work and your children, everything, do it.
If you’re unable to, do what you can do.
Everybody can only do that much, isn’t it?
You want to do everything in the world,
you will definitely go insane.
How much you can do,
each individual has to decide.
Somebody may be able to get up at 6 o’clock
and do all these things joyfully.
Somebody else is not able to do.
Accordingly they have to adjust their life, isn’t it?
Now you have gotten into all this
not because that’s what you want to do;
you are trying to be like somebody else.
That’s your whole problem.
You want to have what other people have.
You don’t know whether you really need it or not.
With all this work, what you have earned,
your children,
your husband,
your wife, or whatever,
you are no more enjoying it.
Then why do you need all this?
All these things you created
because you thought this is the source of your joy,
isn’t it?
But right now that has become the source of your anxiety and misery.
Then you better look at the fundamentals of your life once again, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
You got educated,
you found a job,
you married,
you produced children, all this, why?
Because you thought this is going to be the source of your happiness and well-being.
Isn’t it so?
But now that is taking your life.
If it is so,
you must look at it.
One thing is maybe,
if you’re incapable of handling it,
maybe you have to scale it down.
If you’re capable of enhancing your capabilities, you must do that.
Now, if you invest,
let us say even 30 minutes a day into your yoga,
you will see you will gain immensely,
even in terms of time.
One, first thing that’ll happen is,
your sleep quota will come down.
Now if you’re sleeping for eight hours a day,
that means one third of your life you are sleeping it off, isn’t it?
One third of your life,
you are just sleeping it off.
If your body and your mind is more energized and active
your sleep quota will naturally come down.
So if you gain three, four hours a day,
just in terms of wakefulness,
that’s a huge thing, isn’t it?
Apart from that,
if your body and mind was more organized, you would see...
What I have found with people is,
with simple process of yoga.
Within six to eight weeks,
lot of them, their level of performance becomes such,
what they were doing in eight hours,
they’re very easily able to do it in three to four hours.
Simply because, if you observe yourself through the day,
suppose we take a video of your whole day without you being aware of it,
you will notice
how much unnecessary movement and unnecessary words and
unnecessary activities are happening in your life.
You must do it one day.
Please hire a video camera man and ask him to shoot you
without you knowing about it.
You will see how many unnecessary things you are doing in a day.
If your mind became more organized,
these unnecessary words,
these unnecessary actions,
these unnecessary things will disappear.
Once they go away,
you have lot of time.
You have 24 hours to live, you know?
Now we don’t have to make this into 26 hours,
24 hours are enough.
We can do a lot in 24 hours.
If we are organized and focused human beings,
we can do plenty in 24 hours time.
If you’re disorganized and unfocused,
you think there is no time.
Most of you are not busy;
you’re just preoccupied,
aren’t you?
Isn’t it so?
Isn’t it so?
Just too much preoccupation in the mind.
So whoever the lady,
please invest this half an hour a day.
Get up at 5:30, okay?
And you will see,
suddenly the quality of your life will be very different.
Don’t go on with this argument,
‘I have no time.’
Make time and see,
it’ll make a huge difference.
Sadhguru: First let’s understand what’s music.
Music is a certain arrangement of sounds.
If you arrange sounds in a certain way, it will become noise.
If you arrange sounds in a different way, it will become music.
There’s whole lot of noise passing as music right now, okay?
If you know something about classical music,
you would see classical music involves an enormous amount of mathematic behind it.
There’s a structure
A mathematical structure is been built.
As far as I am concerned,
when I see somebody really good singing,
for me a whole geometry emerges out of that.
So in some way
you are trying to recreate Creation in a sound form.
How profoundly a particular musician,
how far he can go into it is questionable,
but that’s what you’re trying to do.
You’re trying to explore the geometrical patterns,
all the complex patterns that are possible in the form of Creation,
because Creation is just a complex amalgamation of sounds
or reverberations.
So
you definitely know
Leave the words… I mean,
if there are sappy words and people get, you know,
a little sappy with it that’s different
they’re giving meanings to it.
Without any words,
music can bring tears,
music can bring joy,
music can bring love,
music can set moods and emotions and experiences in people.
Just by shear sound, not using words.
Words means it’s a psychological pattern.
Sound means it’s an existential pattern.
So this is why
a music without words is very significant,
and most of the Indian music is largely sound.
Here and there some words,
but largely sound
because sound is an existential structure.
Word
The meaning of the word is a psychological structure.
If I say
If I sing a song in Tamil,
means nothing to you because you may not understand the language.
If you sing in some other language that I do not know,
means nothing to me because I do not understand the meaning.
But the nature of the sound is not like that.
If the sound is arranged in a
a particular geometry of things,
it doesn’t matter who you are,
it doesn’t get you in your emotion
but it gets you in the very being of who you are,
in the basic way this
this Creation has happened here.
So it is an attempt to touch life.
It’s an attempt to imitate life in a different form,
which is a phenomenal thing
and will people will get healthy and well by this?
Definitely if you hit the right pitch.
Questioner: Sadhguru Namaskar.
I just wanted to know what is the importance of doing shraddh
Sadhguru: In the manifestation of life,
the physical life there is –
let me separate this.
There is life and physical life for the sake of understanding.
The physical life has manifested itself.
The physical life energy which generally is referred to as pran or prana
has five basic manifestations
there are ten but that’ll complicate –
the five basic manifestations.
These are called
samana,
prana,
udana,
apana
and vyana.
When a person is declared
Let’s say if a doctor is observing
and they declared that person
at a particular moment that he is dead now,
in the next twenty-one to twenty-four minutes
samana will start exiting.
That means samana is in charge of maintaining temperature in the body.
First thing that
starts happening is body starts cooling down.
Somewhere between forty-eight to sixty-four minutes prana exits.
After that between six to twelve hours udana exists… exits.
Till udana exits
there are tantric processes with which we could revive the body,
but once udana exits there is a
a micro, micro chance
but that is an impractical chance except that
it is impossible to revive the body once udana has exited,
The next thing is apana –
somewhere between eight to eighteen hours this exits.
The vyana which is the preservative nature of prana will start exiting from beyond that
it can continue to exit up to eleven to fourteen days
if it's a normal death.
That is, somebody died of old age,
with the feebleness of life they exited.
For such a person between eleven to fourteen days
certain processes will be happening in the body
to show that there is some element of life
like nails growing,
hair… facial hair these kind of things can be noticed.
If someone has died accidentally, or in other words,
the life was vibrant and he died –
not necessarily totally crushed kind of body –
still the body is intact –
that body, the reverberations of this life will continue
somewhere between forty-eight to ninety days.
So till that time there are things you can do for that life.
What is the thing that you can do for that life?
See, what has happened with death is
your experience of death is
that somebody is gone
but the experience of that person is he’s exited the body.
And simply because he’s exited the body
you have no business with him
you cannot recognize him
and if he comes back you will be terrified
The people that you love, if they pop up
there’ll be terror, not love
because your relationship is … either with their body
or with their conscious mind and emotion.
These things have been left behind –
the body has been left behind
and the conscious intellect and the discerning mind has been left behind.
Now in terms of mind
it is just a bunch of information which has certain tendencies of its own –
natural tendencies which are finding expression in a certain way.
There is no discerning mind.
Once there is no discerning mind,
if you drop
if you put one drop of pleasantness into this mind which has no discerning capability,
no intellect,
now this pleasantness will multiply a million fold.
If you put a drop of unpleasantness,
that unpleasantness will multiply a minion… million fold.
It's like your child who doesn’t have the necessary discernment
he goes out to play
he doesn’t know when to come back.
Till he’s exhausted and he can't do anymore,
till then he wants to play because he has
he doesn’t have the necessary discernment –
okay it's time to go.
Similarly this is an extreme state
where it is much more than a child where completely the discerning mind is absent.
So now whatever quality you put into it,
it will multiply a million fold.
This is what is being referred to as hell and heaven.
If you go into a pleasant state of existence
this is called as heaven;
if you go into a unpleasant state of existence this is called as hell.
These are not geographical locations
these are experiential realities that
a life which has become disembodied is going through.
So what people are trying to do –
how well it is done or how ridiculously it is done today is a different matter,
but there is a whole science
what to do at different steps.
One of the first things you must notice is
traditionally – I don't know if you’re still keeping it in Mumbai,
maybe it's all gone,
but if somebody dies there will be people,
the first thing they will do is they’ll tie the big toes of the dead body together.
Do you still do it or it's gone?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes, it's very important
because tying up the big toes will tighten up the mooladhara in a certain way
so the body cannot be invaded
or attempts to invade the body by that life once again
because… that life has not lived with the awareness
knowing that “This is not me.”
It has always believed “This is me”.
Though it has come out, it tries to enter
through any orifice that is there in the body particularly through the mooladhara that’s life
that’s where life generates
and as body starts cooling down
the only region where warmth will remain till the last point –
the last point of warmth is always the mooladhara.
So it tries to get back.
To avoid this, the first thing is tie the toes
so that that attempt will not happen
because this exiting is happening stage by stage.
The reason why traditionally always we said
if someone dies, within an hour-and-a-half
or maximum of four hours
you must burn the body because this act is going on.
Now this is also true for the living.
If someone very dear to you is dead –
you know he’s dead but your mind starts playing tricks –
maybe he’s going to sit up just now,
maybe a miracle will happen,
maybe god will come and do something fantastic right now.
It has never happened to anybody
but still mind plays this because of the emotions that we have for that particular person.
And that is the same thing is true with the life that has exited from the body
this also believes that still it can get back into the body.
If you want to stop the drama,
first thing is set fire to the body
one-and-a-half hours.
But those days because, you know,
villages and no doctors to tell you for sure he is dead.
Somebody put on the funeral pyre and set fire,
the guy sits up because he’s not yet
These things have happened in the past.
So they stretched it to four hours
so that these mistakes don’t happen,
but as quickly as possible body should be taken away.
If there are agriculture communities
they decided to bury
because they want the forefathers and their body to go back to the soil from which they ate.
You must understand we were in a subsistence farming.
We ate from that land.
That land
A piece of that land is what we are holding as this body.
So they wanted to put this soil back into the same soil,
not somewhere else.
Always you bury him in your land,
never in somebody else’s land
because you ate from this land.
Today you’re buying everything from the store and eating.
You don't know where it's coming from
so burial is not a good thing to do now.
At that time there is a certain process
and to see that it happens as quickly as possible,
always salt and turmeric was put.
So that quickly it dissipates into the soil.
But cremation is a good thing to do
because it closes the chapter.
You will see this
when there’s death in the family, people are crying and hollering and doing all kinds of things.
The moment cremation happens
people will come back home,
everything is quiet.
Nobody is crying for some time
because suddenly the truth has sunk in, “It's over.
The game is up.”
This is not only for you.
This is also for the disembodied being who’s just exited
because he’s also in that illusion that he can get back
and that stops, and that’s a good thing.
And there’re many rituals to see that you influence
that you can somehow put a drop of sweetness into that non-discerning mind
so that the sweetness will multiply many fold
and they will live comfortably
or they will live in a… a certain self-induced heaven.
That’s the idea behind the rituals,
if it is done properly.
Sadhguru: Design of the human system is very important in the spiritual process (Laughs)
and we don’t have to bother about the design because
there has been… this design is a fantastic design.
Your business is only to provide it the right kind of material.
Now, the architect may put up a fantastic design for this building –
still with what kind of material you build it
and who builds it makes the difference.
So when it comes to basic Creation, you have no participation in the design.
Design… Most fantastic design has already been done.
You just have to put the right kind of material,
right kind of choice of materials and how you do it,
that’s about this.
About everything else you do in the world,
there is no need for you to innovate anything.
If you just simply imitate what’s in nature,
it’ll be too phenomenal.
People will think you’re a genius but you’re a copycat (Laughs),
that’s all it takes.
If you… if you just have enough observation and perception
for all the fantastic design that is everywhere
in every leaf, every flower, every
Just take an ant,
ask them to observe an ant for twenty-four hours without taking their eyes off.
You will see it’s the most phenomenal design –
these six legs or eight legs without ever getting tangled up,
you know how… Don’t go for a centipede, it’s too complex (Interviewer Laughs).
Just an ant, you could… If you can design an automobile like an ant,
that’s it, you know.
Yes?
Sadhguru: Right now India as a nation
is an extremely diverse population.
We speak different languages;
we eat different kinds of food;
we dress differently;
we think differently;
we look different;
our colors are different; ours
you know ethnic backgrounds are different;
everything is different.
So what is the common thread that binds us to make us a nation?
If you take away the cultural fabric of this nation
there is nothing to hold this country as one nation, please see this.
The only commonality in this country is there is a cultural thread
which somehow collects;
whether you are a Tamil, or you are a Bengali, or a Punjabi or a Gujarati
there are a few cultural aspects which string us together.
If you remove this,
after sometime you will wonder
why should be one nation;
why can't I have my own Tamil nation?
Already the idea has come, isn't it?
Isn’t it so?
Already the idea is being propagated or no?
It is only because there is a cultural thread which binds us
we can still say this is one nation;
otherwise you will see if you
if you damage the cultural fabric which gives us some sense of commonality
then you will wonder why should we be in one nation;
you will try to break it.
And every time you try to break a nation
it is going to happen in cruel ways;
it never happens gently.
You have seen the India - Pakistan partition;
now you are seeing what's happening in Sri Lanka.
It always happens in extreme pain.
So we don’t need that once again.
We have had it 60 years ago and that’s enough
(Sadhguru): So this is the beauty of your life
that this moment you can be whichever way you want to be.
Now this freedom is what humanity is struggling with right now.
If you are suffering your bondage, it's alright,
but you are actually suffering your freedom.
If your life was as fixed as any other creature’s life,
you would not experience any stress.
You would go through it effortlessly.
Now your problem is
there is freedom to be whichever way you want to be the next moment.
This is what you are struggling with.
If you are suffering your bondage it's alright.
If you are suffering your freedom, that’s a tragedy, isn't it?
Your life is not a tragedy because this happened or that happened;
your life is a tragedy because
everything is happening and you are missing it.
Yes?
This did not happen; that did not happen;
that is not a tragedy.
Sun came up in the morning, but you cannot experience it; ;
you are breathing, you cannot experience that; ;
you are alive, you cannot enjoy that
this is the tragedy, isn't it?
Yes or no?
What happened, what did not happen is not the point;
the most significant aspect of your life is that you are alive right now.
Is that so?
Everything else is secondary and incidental.
Is that so?
Yes?
But you are not aware of your aliveness.
You are busy with your psychological nonsense.
Your thoughts, your emotions have become
your Your psychological reality has become far more important
than your existential reality.
What it means is you are so enamored with your own petty creation,
that you are completely missing the grandeur of Creator’s creation,
that’s what it means,
but you will go to the temple and broke
You do all kinds of things
but if you truly value creation,
the best thing that you can do is
to pay attention and to experience it, isn't it?
Yes or no?
What is the greatest tribute
suppose somebody cooked some nice food
and presented it in front of you,
what is the greatest tribute
that you write a poetry on it,
or you joyfully eat it,
which is better?
Somebody has done a work of art,
you ignore it and give him an award,
is that great
or you truly appreciate and enjoy it, is that great?
If you truly value the Creator and the creation,
the best thing is that you lived blissfully;
that is the best appreciation for the Creator,
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Shiva being the ultimate outlaw
you must understand what is outlaw.
Many of you have suffered the in-laws (Laughter/Applause).
I hope you won’t meet too many outlaws.
But when we say the ultimate outlaw,
you must understand all laws –
all laws –
are of some meaning only in the physical sphere of life.
See suppose you did not have a body –
I want you to just imagine yourself,
you don’t have a body –
what law do you have to follow (Laughs)?
You can go wherever you want, you can do whatever you want.
Yes?
Only because you have a body –
where to go,
where not to go,
what to do,
what not to do?
Only in the physical realm,
the laws have a meaning.
One who has transcended the physical,
he has no laws.
So he is a outlaw.
He is out of all laws.
This is what spiritual process means –
within yourself,
you are out of all laws because
once you transcend your physical nature,
none of the laws bind you.
In the society – yes.
But within yourself –
no,
because you are an outlaw because
you are out of the physical nature.
So in that context,
he is the ultimate outlaw
and Mahashivarathri is his day.
The significance of the day is that on that day,
there is a phenomenal upsurge of energy within the human system.
This is why on that night,
you are not supposed to sleep,
you must keep your spine vertical
so that you make use of this natural upsurge within you.
So on that night,
there is a huge festival here.
This year, this is going to be a mega festival
because we have crossed the twenty-one year cycle,
this is a new cycle (Applause)
and it is going to be a phenomenal event.
It’s an incredible night and
we will have many things happening on that night.
We are
Already our teams are working to make this into a major possibility
for every human being
and we will also make it happen across the country
and in many parts of the world in various cities,
having video feeds and stuff,
though there is a time difference in the other countries.
And as a precursor to this in a way
Not really a precursor but this is a special event which happens only once –
only once,
that is we don’t repeat this.
This will happen in December.
Till now, we have done three special events like this,
where they are production quality.
Entire ashram is done up for this purpose.
Not like other programs, which are repeated.
This is only onetime programs.
We did Vaibhav Shiva,
which was about how Shiva taught yoga.
Then we did three years later, Leela –
this is about how Krishna taught yoga.
Then about three years ago,
we did Mahabharat,
which is the grandest story that you can imagine.
It’s a story inside a story inside a story.
It’s the most phenomenal story,
it’s the longest story on the planet.
So, an eight-day event happened like this,
hundreds of hours of videos.
They are still editing,
not released after three years (Laughs).
So this year, in the month of December,
between twenty-second and twenty-sixth,
we will have an event,
which is about the devotees of Shiva (Applause).
We have not
There are different types of cultures,
which have evolved out of devotion for Shiva.
They are in different geographical locations in the country,
largely,
and they have their own practices,
they have their own traditions,
cultures,
their own flavor,
their own poetry,
their own music.
So, this will be a
an exquisite event of music, art, poetry and of course the spiritual fundamental.
So this will be about the devotees of Shiva.
This will be a limited number of people,
we can’t have a crowd like this (Laughs),
but others can hang-out later (Laughter).
Okay?
We will make it available to you in some way.
So this will be a four… five day event in the month of December,
starting on the winter solstice,
which is twenty-second of December… twenty-first of December.
It’s an event to look forward to because it’s an onetime event,
we will not repeat those events again.
Those of you who can afford to be there in terms of time and whatever else,
please make sure you are there.
I am excited (Laughter/Applause).
(Sadhguru): One of your limitations,
one of your problems,
one of your nonsense that people suffer around you,
one of those things should go.
You can’t leave all of it wholesale.
At least one,
shall we?
Because without transformation,
empty spirituality,
talking spirituality,
acting spiritual is no good.
Some transformation must happen isn’t it?
Please make that happen
so that
when you live people will enjoy living with you,
when you die they will miss you,
that’s how you should live.
On a certain day
Shankran Pillai’s wife
was particularly incensed about her husband.
So she made a soup
and put five extra spoons of chili
and she came and served it.
It was hot,
steaming hot
and she wants to see what happens.
She rung her hands
but he was reading the newspaper,
she said the soup is ready,
she said the soup is ready,
she said the soup is ready
and he said hmm..hmm..hmm and still reading the newspaper.
Then she wanted to see if it really works
whether the chili powder is adulterated.
Not strong enough.
So she thought let her check it up
took a spoon full and just put it.
It just exploded in her mouth.
Tears welled up.
Tears started flowing.
Just at that moment
Shankaran Pillai kept his newspaper down and came.
He looked at her and asked
why re you crying?
She said
you know just last year my mother died
and how much she loved this soup.
When I just saw this soup bowl
it reminded me of my mother and tears came.
Oh is that so don’t worry
what to do?
We all lose our mothers and fathers some time.
It’s all right.
Then Shankaran Pillai went back to his newspaper with the soup
and reading the newspaper he put it in his mouth
and it went boom like dynamite.
Because this was a full spoonful.
Tears came into his eyes.
Then she came and said
oh you are also emotional about my mother.
He said
no no I’m not crying because your mother died.
I’m crying because that good mother left
and she left you here and went.
This is not the way to live.
When you live people should enjoy your presence.
When you die they should miss you.
If the reverse happens
that means we lived the wrong way.
Isn’t it?
Sadhguru: See, speech is a special gift to a human being.
In terms of the complexity of what a human being can utter,
no other creature can do this.
Well, an elephant can trumpet louder than us;
it can have you paralyzed.
If it comes and trumpets anywhere near you,
it’ll have you paralyzed just with shear sound.
A lion can roar.
Birds can do so many things,
but no creature is capable of coming out
with the complexity with which we can utter.
The languages were consciously created
so that simple utterance of the language
will purify the system.
Sanskrit language was created like this.
So most of us probably are speaking in English language most of the time.
Of all the
not necessarily of all the languages –
compared to the Indian languages,
the vernacular languages
or compared to Spanish or Latin or even Chinese or whatever,
English language has the minimum range of sounds
very minimum.
This is why right from your birth if you’re speaking only English language
you find it so difficult to utter some other mantra
or some other language,
because you're using a very minimum range of expression.
So the more minimalistic
the range of sounds that you utter happens,
the less Vak Shuddhi you have.
So now you have to fix it
by a certain active awareness and volition.
One is the sound.
Another is the intention of the sound.
You can say ‘aye’ out of great love
or you can say ‘aye’ out of something else –
now, both of them will not produce
the same impact on the system
because the volition of the action is
the important or
The major part of the karmic process is in the volition,
not in the action.
Similarly, major part of the karma
is in the volition, not in the sound.
But if the sounds were scientifically structured,
as in the mantras and in Sanskrit language,
then even without much… much awareness
if you utter, still you would benefit
simply because of the nature of the arrangement of sounds.
But now we are speaking languages which are no more made like that,
so it is best to handle it with intention.
I think many times I've told you about this,
about this lady who came out of a concentration camp
during the World War II
and she took a vow… you know?
She just took a vow,
“If I speak to somebody now,
if this happens to be my last…” –
it could be –
“If this happens to be my last words to this person,
how I would utter this,
like that I will utter to whoever I speak.”
It's a fantastic way of fixing your Vak Shuddhi.
Vak Shuddhi means cleansing the sounds that you utter.
To become conscious of the sounds,
the science of sounds
or the impact that this has on us
and how to come to this,
it is a phenomenal thing;
it's not going to happen in a lifetime to understand.
This is Nada Yoga;
it takes a whole lot of thing.
So for that, to do Nada Yoga you have a chant.
If you keep it going whenever
I never consciously think about this,
but if I sit, stand,
you know,
Shambho Shiva simply happens to me,
not because I intend to utter it,
it just… my breath just takes that form.
It is not happening just
because I sit in a program
or I am doing something important or not important.
You can just bring it into your life like that.
A lot of people have decided to use filthy words (Laughs)
in their conversations.
Or these days,
particularly I'm seeing the youth in United States
trying to follow
form a whole sentence with just one word,
you know.
I see a whole lot of people in India also
have picked these things up
and when they utter these words,
people keep on saying “Shit, Shit…”
I keep reminding them
“please don't do it here,
please don't do it here.” (Laughs)
So (Laughs)
this is one way of bringing the right kind of reverberation in the system.
Why this is important is
if you simply become silent within yourself,
there is no better way;
it is the ultimate way.
If you can just simply become still within yourself,
that is the best way.
If that's not happening,
the next best and the next best is like this –
you can say Shiva, it is the closest thing to stillness;
otherwise just one word doesn't do for you,
you can have a little more elaborate
You need a sing-song,
you can do Brahmananda Swaroopa,
something or whatever mantra you picked among those
five, six that are there.
Whatever you resonate with, you just do that.
Above all,
to bring the right intention into every sound that you utter.
If you bring the right intention into every single sound that you utter,
these sounds will reverberate in a certain way within you.
This foundation of the right kind of reverberation is necessary
if you want to use this human system
as a higher possibility;
otherwise it will only drag behind you all the time.
If you want this to be a bigger possibility,
this must have a foundation of the right kind of reverberation
and Vak Shuddhi
or cleansing the sounds that you utter
is an important part of that.
But if you can become utterly still,
nothing like it.
(Sadhguru): One thing you need to understand is,
the technology is subjective;
because, it’s about you.
You have known objective technologies –
how to fix the car,
how to fix the airplane,
how to fix the aircraft;
all these things.
You can stay away from those things look at them and fix them,
they are different,
but this is subjective technology, it’s about you.
So if you have to look at this,
in some way you have to open up.
So if we have to open you up
see today
there was a time they were doing surgeries on the street side, you know that?
Yes?
And if too much blood comes and they would just pick up mud and
throw it and stop bleeding in the village, yes?
Do you know?
Yes or no?
If there is a cut or a wound and there is too much bleeding
they would simply take mud and put it somehow to stop the bleeding,
but today we have understood,
even if we have to open a small opening in the body
we need a certain sterile condition to do it.
We have understood that much, isn’t it?
So whether it’s the physical body,
means we need a certain kind of condition.
Similarly if we have to open up you as a person,
we need a different kind of atmosphere.
We need a committed atmosphere;
in a casual atmosphere you never do it.
Why today any thinking person
little people who consider themselves intelligent in the world
have an allergy to anything spiritual
is simply because of this,
because spirituality has presented itself in such ridiculous ways.
They are so pathetic.
Isn’t it so?
There are all kinds of idiots on the planet,
but the so called religious and spiritual idiots
take the cake anywhere in the world,
isn't it so?
Yes?
This is simply because people started handling spirituality
in uncommitted manner;
anywhere, everywhere talking about it.
On the street side they are talking about Krishna
and how he did this and Bhagavad Gita.
It’s just become ridiculous,
because you are not demanding
a certain involvement and commitment from people.
Just anywhere you are going on
like a film song or a commercial thing.
Now slowly it has become so ridiculous,
people have just dismissed the value of it absolutely.
Now it is only the ignorant and the uneducated
who listen to Mahabharath and this one and that one.
The educated because they’ve already dismissed it as nonsense;
because it’s happening in such ridiculous ways.
It is not being presented properly.
Not creating the right kind of situation for it to grow;
simply doing it anywhere.
So, subjective technology is never attempted in uncommitted atmospheres,
it has to be done in a committed atmosphere.
We want to just align these four wheels on which you carry your life.
See you may think and imagine many things about you.
In your experience the only four realities of your life is
physical body, mind, emotion and energy
that supports all this. Isn't it so?
Other things you imagine and you believe
from your traditions and cultures.
These are the only things which are in your living experience.
If you want to go somewhere,
if you want to make any kind of journey,
you can only start your journey
from where you are right now,
wherever you want to go.
You want to go to Mumba Devi
or to the moon,
you can only start your journey from the seat in which you are sitting right now.
Isn't it so?
If you try to start your journey somewhere else,
you will become hallucinatory.
Most of the religion in the world,
over 90% of the religion in the world has become hallucinatory,
because they are all trying to start from the third step to heaven
not from where they are.
You must first realize,
what is the experiential reality of who you are,
what is the next step and the next step
and the next step.
This is the only way you are genuinely going to go somewhere;
otherwise, you will become hallucinatory.
This hallucinatory religion has brought some solace to you,
but not found any liberation or freedom within you.
Now you just believe
everything is being taken care of for you by god everything,
but tomorrow morning if something happens in your life that
you do not like suddenly you crack up, isn't it,
because it is so surface what you believe in.
Life can crack you.
It doesn’t matter what kind of hallucinations you have,
life situations are capable of breaking you if they don’t go right, isn't it?
Now if you are a believer,
if life is not happening your way it must be
definitely happening his way, isn't it?
You must be even more happy,
but that’s not the reality of your life.
You want the life to happen the way you want it.
If you have any problem in your life right now,
it is just this life is not going the way you think it should go.
Is there any other problem with your life?
Hum?
Is there any other problem with your life?
This is the only problem that human being have.
Life is not going the way they think it should go. Isn't it so?
If it is not going your way
it must be going the creator’s way, isn't it?
You must be even more happy
but that is not the reality;
because, there are too many deceptions in the mind.
Barkha Dutt: Tell us a little bit about yourself.
Your story is well-chronicled
but what is of interest to people is that you started off as
Sadhguru: I haven’t read that book, I don’t know,
I hope she’s written nice things about me
Barkha Dutt: She’s written a very brilliant,
Arundhati’s… Subramaniam has written a very brilliant,
very brilliant book.
Sadhguru: No, she’s brilliant
but what’s she written about me (Laughter/Applause)?
Barkha Dutt:… One of the things that she has said is
that you give great space for dissent,
you like a good argument,
that you’re not an… you’re not one of those dictatorial gurus (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: I don’t know where is a dictatorial guru,
I think the… most people have not met a guru,
they have just seen calendar images and made conclusions.
I don’t think they have met any genuine guru.
There are a whole lot of people who should have been temple priests
who are good entrepreneurs and they’ve become gurus today
that’s different, okay? (Laughs)
Barkha Dutt: Temple priests
Sadhguru: No, no, see
Barkha Dutt: … who have become good entrepreneurs.
Sadhguru: No, I’m saying
Barkha Dutt: Just another word of… way of saying they’re charlatans.
Sadhguru: That’s a strong word.
Maybe that’s enterprise (Laughter).
I am not a enterprise.
So because I am not an enterprise,
I want everybody to ask whatever the damn question they have,
it doesn’t matter how ridiculous or how intelligent,
how nonsensical it is, it doesn’t matter.
If the question means something to you, it means something to me.
It doesn’t matter how brilliant it is,
if it doesn’t mean anything to you, I am not willing to listen to it.
Barkha Dutt: But you’re saying that many, many people are
who are positioning themselves as gurus are really
only elevating themselves and fooling people. I’ve
Sadhguru: (Laughs) No, I didn’t say
Barkha Dutt: Okay, I’m saying that.
Sadhguru: I’m saying (Laughter)
Barkha Dutt: But
Sadhguru: (Laughs) The thing there is there is a vacuum,
somebody is trying to fill it.
Barkha Dutt: Yes. And Sadhguru, you have been
Sadhguru: Are they qualified to be that?
Questionable thing.
Barkha Dutt: But a very genuine concern –
and you have been on some of my television programs
where we have spoken about this –
is whether god-men are often con-men?
And how does this lady here (Gestures towards somebody)
know the difference between who’s a god-man and who’s a conman
and is a human being capable of being a god-man?
Do you think of yourself as a god-man?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Why are you underestimating that lady (Laughter/Applause)?
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let it be my question (Sadhguru laughs).
How do I spot the difference between a god-man and a con man
if I don’t even believe that humans can be godly?
I think humans can be brave and wonderful and inspiring
and
But I don’t think that they have magical powers.
Sadhguru: See, did you ever see God having magical powers?
Barkha Dutt: No, I’ve never seen God.
Sadhguru: No, then why are you saying he must have magical powers (Laughter)?
So first of all,
this god-man is essentially a media-coined word.
Nobody claims that he is a god-man, okay?
Some are goddamn men, that’s different (Laughter).
Nobody… I don’t think anybody has personally claimed,
“I am a god-man.”
I have not met anybody like that.
Now, that is a
That’s another kind of profession,
putting labels on everybody, you know (Laughs).
Leaving that alone, what is it?
This is a culture - you must understand this,
it’s unfortunately all mixed up today –
this is a godless culture, you must understand this.
There has never been an idea of a god in this culture.
Only in competition with what came from outside,
because we saw they could rule us,
they were dominant and we thought we have to imitate their ways,
we also started making it up to some extent,
not successfully though.
Yes,
but we know the technology of god-making.
When I say technology
We are using the English word “god”
but that word doesn’t exist in India,
here we call them devas.
What a deva means is –
see today media is projecting Tendulkar as a cricketing god.
It’s very appropriate to this culture
because if somebody excels beyond a certain level in any field
he may be a sportsperson,
he may be a warrior,
he may be an artist,
he may be anything
if he excels beyond what normally average human beings think is possible for them,
he goes,
they recognized him as a deva
and he’s worth looking up to
because he becomes a guiding light for them.
That’ll anyway happen,
whether you like it, you believe it, you don’t believe it.
Barkha Dutt: Sure.
Sadhguru: In every field, somebody rises, he becomes the light for the rest of the people.
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: So similarly, in the inner spaces
When I say the inner spaces,
the quality of your life is not determined
by what kind of house you live in,
what clothes you wear,
what car you parked outside, what things,
jing-bang happening around you,
no,
this moment how joyful, peaceful, blissed out you are within yourself.
Now if I sit here,
we’re sitting here in the same space,
breathing the same air,
probably we ate the same kind of food
I don’t know what you eat (Laughter)
but if I sit here now with my eyes closed,
the way I am within myself,
I will not exchange this (Laughs) for anything in the universe.
Now, when people see, no matter
The number of things I’m managing is insane.
Everybody thinks, “Sadhguru, is it possible?
You must go crazy someday.”
All volunteers, over three million volunteers,
enterprises, businesses, okay, projects, mega-projects on the street,
all kinds of activity going around the globe.
If anybody has to go nuts, it’s me, okay?
Because all run by volunteers.
Run by volunteers means nobody is trained for the job
and you can’t fire them for inefficiency
because they’re volunteers (Laughter).
All right (Laughs)?
And anytime, they come in anytime and do great things,
anytime they’ll walk away, all right?
And nothing should collapse.
Till now, I must tell you this,
as we are sitting here, this day,
probably little over three hundred and odd programs,
Inner Engineering programs are happening in the world.
Never in the last thirty-three years,
one program has been abandoned or has failed (Applause).
That …that takes enormous management
but nobody will ever see me getting angry
or miserable or tensed out or stressed out.
Barkha Dutt: You’ve never lost your temper?
Sadhguru: You want me to now (Laughter) (Laughs)?
Do I look like I’m incapable of that?
It’s not that, it’s not that I’m incapable of anger,
it's just that I have never given that privilege to anybody.
I’ve not given this privilege to anybody –
they can make me happy,
they can make me unhappy,
they can make me angry,
they can make me miserable,
no.
I kept (Applause) these privileges to myself.
So people
you’re talking about miracles or whatever.
People ask me,
“Sadhguru, everybody… in every ashram, miracles are happening.
You are beating all the miracles down.
If we say something happened, you make us look like fools.”
No miracle.
I say, “What? You want me to pull a pigeon out of my pocket” (Laughter)?
If I pull a pigeon
Barkha Dutt: But there are
Sadhguru: No, if I (Laughs)
Barkha Dutt: …gurus
Sadhguru: If I
Barkha Dutt: …who claim to do that,
who have been challenged by rationalists
Sadhguru: No, I’ll come to this.
If I pull a pigeon out of my pocket, I have a shitty pocket (Laughter)
and you have a bird (Both laugh) –
what are you going to do with this?
You come to me, I will show you the miracle.
I have thousands of people, who are working seven days a week,
sixteen to eighteen days… eighteen hours every day.
In the last two… five-ten years,
not a single moment of irritation, agitation, anger in their life.
This is a miracle (Applause),
this is a miracle we want to manifest.
You don’t want a miracle? ___ (Unclear)
Barkha Dutt: I agree, this is a miracle.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: And not that pigeon.
Do you have a pigeon in your pocket (Sadhguru laughs)? Okay (Laughs).
Sadhguru: I told you I don’t like a shitty pocket (Laughs).
Sadhguru: We are at a time of the year
which is considered
significant for those who are in the spiritual path.
The Tamil month of Margazhi starts from sixteenth.
What is the significance of this month?
It is at this time of the year
that the planet Earth is closest to the sun.
So, this should have been the hottest month,
but this is the time when the planet is shy of the sun
and the northern face faces away from the sun.
In the southern hemisphere,
this is the hottest part of the year.
In the northern hemisphere,
this is the coolest part of the year
because the northern hemisphere
or the northern face of the planet is facing away from the sun,
but it is closest.
So, in terms of temperature,
because of the closeness to the sun,
the angle at which the sun’s rays hit the planet is very diffused.
But in terms of sun’s gravity functioning on the planet,
right now it is the… it is at the highest.
So, the maximum pull of the sun’s gravity
is functioning upon the planet at this time.
So, this Margazhi month is a time to bring balance to the system.
It is like if something is flying all over,
if you just pull it - pooh, (Gestures pulling downwards) it gets centralized.
So, that is the effect that the Margazhi month has on the human system
it pulls you from the base.
So, it brings balance and stability.
Recognizing this that one needs to bring balance and stability,
this is a time
when - there are practices in the yogic system
which is transmitted itself into culture in many different ways
this is a time when men will do what generally what women are supposed to do
and women will do what men are supposed to do;
in the sense,
in Tamil Nadu there’s a culture
that this is a time when men will go on nagarasankeertan.
That means men will practice devotion.
They will sing.
Singing and devotion is largely considered feminine.
So, men will practice this.
Women will practice making geometrical figures.
Geometry and masculinity are very directly connected.
If a woman sees something
let’s not say woman
if feminine sees something,
it will always pay maximum significance to the color and form of that.
If the masculine sees something,
it always sees the geometry first
and then the color and the form.
So, it is this month,
women practice geometry
not on paper,
but in front of their homes
through the Margazhi month, every woman is supposed to draw geometrical figures.
Of course, today you have templates.
They are no good. (Laughs) (Few Laugh)
You must practice geometry
because shifting from color and form to geometrical shapes and forms.
This is a simple
transformation of a certain signs into a cultural dimension.
Because of the closeness to the sun,
because of a general pull downward,
Muladhara becomes the most dominant.
Because Muladhara becomes most dominant,
the preservative nature of life becomes dominant in the body.
In the yogic system,
we would say when the preservation is dominant,
this is not a time to grow.
All life in the northern hemisphere is at its minimum right now.
The growth of the tree,
the plant and if you plant a seed,
you can see this - the growth will be slowest at this time,
not only because of the temperature,
because of a general pull downward.
So, because the growth will be very
because the growth will be held back,
because of a certain inertia in the life force,
this is the time the body can recoup itself.
This is the time body can preserve itself well.
The inertia caused in all aspects of life
because of the closeness of the sun
and being on the wrong side,
everything being pulled down,
seed will not sprout very well.
Recognizing this, Margazhi
the month of Margazhi,
there never are any marriages in Tamil Nadu.
Still it is being maintained
because this is not a time for conception.
Even those who are in
in the life of householders,
even a grihastha practices Brahmacharya for this period generally.
It is based on this,
you see people are going to the hills,
forty days of Brahmacharya before they go there
because this is not a time for conception
because the seed will not sprout as well as it would,
another time.
So, in the science of breeding the right kind of human beings,
Margazhi is not the time to conceive.
There are many aspects attached to this.
We don’t (Laughs) have to go by that
because it will develop a whole prejudice against the December-born people. (Laughs) (Few Laugh)
No, December-born is not the problem, December-conceived. (Laughs)
Not necessarily so.
It is just that to sync our lives with the natural movements of the Earth
to see that
we ride the cycles of this planet,
we are not crushed by the cycles of this planet.
Sadhguru: If you look at his life’s situations,
the way life happened to him,
it’s a continuous series of disasters.
Loses his kingdom what is rightfully his,
ends up in the forest,
loses his wife,
gets kidnapped,
fights a brutal war which he’s not interested in,
brings back his wife,
suffers very uncharitable comments about his wife from everybody around,
a wife who is very dear to him
pregnant with two children
twins,
takes her and leaves her in the forest,
never sees her again in his life,
unknowingly ends up in a battle against his own children,
fights a battle with his children,
gets defeated by them,
goes through a disgrace of that,
endless disasters,
and wife dies without he ever meeting her,
but still - why?
The significance of Rama is not the life situations,
the significance of Rama is
the way he conducted himself through this disastrous series,
series of disasters that occurred to him,
with how much gracefulness he conducted himself right thorough his life.
With all the disasters happening,
never once was he seen angry,
never once was he seen cursing someone,
never once was he seen freaking out,
conducted everything gracefully.
So people who are seeking liberation sought Rama,
people who are seeking a graceful life sought Rama,
people who understood,
people who had the wisdom to see that
external situations can go wrong any moment,
just any moment.
‘Oh, it’ll not happen to us,’ is a foolish way to live.
Hmm?
‘It’ll not happen to me’ is a foolish way to live.
‘Even if it happens, I will go through that gracefully’
is a wise way to live.
So people sought Rama,
because they saw this phenomenal wisdom.
Though life became a continuous series of disasters,
never once wavered from his truthfulness,
from what he set up for himself,
the fundamentals of his life,
never once deviated from that,
just hung on to what he has to do,
conducted with utmost balance.
In fact, people on the spiritual path,
there is a tradition of seeking disasters. (Laughter)
Really.
Many spiritual seekers go about
asking for something to go wrong with their life.
You don’t have to necessarily do that
because they want themselves to be fully tested
before death approaches.
Before death approaches they want to be fully tested,
they want to be quality checked,
no matter what happens they’ll go through it gracefully,
because when the moment of shedding the body comes
that’s the time you’ll lose your balance.
Everything is fine,
when the moment of everything that you know
as reality is going to slip off from your hands,
that’s the time when you lose your control a bit.
So, people seeking disasters -
like Akka Mahadevi goes about saying,
‘Oh Shiva, do this to me,
make me hungry,
make sure that I don’t get any food,
and in case I get it,
before I put it in my mouth make sure it falls off my hands.
Before I pick it up from the ground
make sure a hungry dog eats it away.’
Make me go through everything
so that I will learn to conduct myself gracefully
irrespective of what the outside situation is -
it’s an extreme form of devotion
and if you want to be ready,
when the moment of leaving comes,
you don’t want to falter even a bit.
That is the moment you need to handle gracefully.
Takes some practice,
suddenly one day if it happens,
then you won’t be able to handle it,
and when the moment of losing your body and everything that you know as life,
to conduct that day gracefully,
people seek Rama.
They want tribulations,
trials and tribulations in their life
consciously seeking.
If you see this,
anywhere across the world –
I’m not asking you to take this path but
it’s been the tradition everywhere in the world.
Spiritual path means
first thing is to consciously seek poverty,
hmm,
consciously to seek poverty.
To conduct yourself gracefully through poverty is not a easy thing.
if you get hungry you will become -
all sense of being human will be lost,
you will become like an animal.
When you’re hungry,
when you’re angry, you’re an animal, isn’t it?
To conduct that gracefully -
you should see the yogis in India,
they never ask for anything,
they keep going.
You can see they are hungry,
they’ve not eaten for days sometimes,
but they will conduct themselves so gracefully.
Any number of them,
you know, some
I’ve seen any number of them,
You offer them money they won’t take it.
If you just offer one meal they will take it,
you offer money for one more meal he won’t take it
because he wants that challenge to be there in his life all the time,
because if I take money for two meals today,
tomorrow I will logically convince myself,
why not ten meals?
Then slowly I’ll organize my whole life,
like see, you have bought footwear for three lifetimes (Laughter),
just in case if you have to come and walk the planet once again and once again,
don’t you have enough footwear for three life times, or ten? (Laughs)
So once you add one more,
one more will become logically acceptable,
and it’ll grow endlessly.
Just see to what extent we’ve taken our survival process.
Our survival process has hit the sky
and still it’s not enough.
To conduct yourself through hunger, to poverty,
to various kinds of physical
and other kinds of difficulties gracefully,
for this people sought Rama.
And actually if you look at almost everybody that you worship,
Rama, continuous disaster,
conducted himself gracefully.
Krishna, everything that he aspired for,
what he wanted to create
his whole life was about bringing the political process and the spiritual process,
he wanted to marry the political and the spiritual process.
So he moved around with the kings
and tried to bring spiritual process into their life
but it ended up in a disastrous war.
Disastrous means horrible war it became.
He tried to bring about something else,
but something else happened.
So we worship him.
Jesus, got nailed for very small things,
but we still worship him.
Not because of the success in their life,
but for the gracefulness with which they conducted their failure. Isn't it?
Isn’t it so?
They conducted their difficult moments,
most difficult moments gracefully,
and that’s what is valued,
and that is the highest value in one’s life.
It’s not the question of how much you have,
what you did, what you
what happened,
what did not happen.
Whatever happened -
how did you conduct yourself,
that is what determines the quality of who you are,
not what happened in your life.
You may make a billion dollars because the market is doing well.
Okay.
That doesn’t mean anything,
that's a social situation, isn’t it so?
So you’re living in America and you’re in a certain level of affluence,
you go to Africa, and they are in a certain level of poverty,
you may think you’re doing better.
You’re not doing better.
In your society you may be a failure.
Yes or no?
Yes?
In your society you may be a failure.
In another society you may look like you’re a millionaire.
It doesn’t mean anything.
It’s a social situation.
It’s all right you can enjoy the comforts that come with it,
but the important thing about the making of the human being is
whatever the situation,
how gracefully can you handle it?
So all these people,
whether a Jesus or a Krishna or a Rama,
these are fabulous representations of
conducting their life gracefully through most difficult situations.
So, either you can seek an easy life,
remain untested
and you will see this, it’s happening to lots of people.
They look like perfectly fine,
till one big challenge came in their life.
Isn’t it so?
Are you not seeing this?
When one big challenge comes,
you will see who they are.
When something that they expected did not go the way they think it should go,
you will see they spill themselves all over the place.
So the important thing is,
to bring this gracefulness into yourself.
People are always doing thanks giving,
for things that they got.
Things that you get will not add to your life.
See, if suppose
the whole world was living just in a hut,
all we know is a hut.
A hut would be great; we wouldn’t need a mansion, isn’t it so?
Yes or no?
Only that your neighbor has a mansion,
you have a hut, that’s the problem.
This is a different kind of problem.
Your neighbor has a mansion,
you live in your hut and still gracefully,
that is wonderful, isn’t it?
You can… you can see this if you come to India.
This is a huge house, next is a shanty,
but both of them is not any less.
You can’t reduce him into nothing
just because he is living in a little hut.
He is as proud as you are and that’s nice,
that a human being irrespective of how somebody else is,
he carries himself well.
Not with just pride, but with gracefulness,
and real things should go
only to that that
even if your head fell off,
you still can walk gracefully.
Even if you have to go to the gallows,
you still walk gracefully.
This is the quality of the human being.
Rest is only the quality of the situation, isn’t it?
(Questioner): Attention. How does attention come into…?
(Sadhguru): Attention is just mental alertness.
Mental alertness and awareness are two different things.
Awareness is purely life.
What level of intensity your life is functioning,
that is the level of awareness you are.
But mental attention,
you can put it on and put it off.
Your aliveness you cannot
you cannot put it on and put it off; it’s on.
What is the level of intensity is all there is,
but mental attention you can close it, isn’t it?
You can turn it on;
you can turn it off.
Isn’t it so?
You can pay attention to something;
you can withdraw your attention from something. Is it so?
So that’s a different dimension.
That is the act of the mind;
that is again not reality.
It is just attention of the mind;
it is the act of the mind.
Mind can do many things
but it’s of a different dimension.
It is psychological;
it is not existential.
We’ll leave it there; we’ll… Oh, more questions! Oh!
(Questioner): Using my senses am I being aware
or am I perceiving something? Can I say fourth fourth dimension is awareness
(Sadhguru): That’s exactly what we went through just now.
What’s your name, I am sorry?
(Questioner): Kavitha.
(Sadhguru): Hum?
(Questioner): Kavitha
(Sadhguru): Kavitha?
We just went through that.
You didn’t pay attention.
(Questioner): I did. I didn’t understand.
(Sadhguru): Hum?
(Questioner): I didn’t understand, little confused.
(Sadhguru): Okay, see right now are you awake?
(Questioner): I am awake.
(Sadhguru): First are you alive?
(Questioner): Yes I am.
(Sadhguru): Yes.
Next are you awake?
(Questioner): I am awake.
(Sadhguru): How awake?
(Questioner): Quite awake.
(Sadhguru): Awake enough.
Awake enough to hear what I say;
awake enough to see where I was sitting;
awake enough to know that
this many people are around you. Yes?
(Questioner): Right.
(Sadhguru): Now that you are this awake,
you are perceiving all these facts
which are around you.
You know this many people are around you.
You know I am speaking.
You know I am sitting here.
All these things you’re perceiving.
How, through what?
(Questioner): Through my eyes.
(Sadhguru): Through your sense organs.
Not only through your eyes, through your ears
and certain amount of other senses also working.
So through your five sense organs
you are perceiving right now.
Because you are at a certain level of wakefulness,
you are perceiving what is around you.
At least the physical around you, yes?
(Questioner): Yes.
(Sadhguru): You don’t know what is happening in the person
who is sitting next to you, isn’t it?
You do not know what’s happening in this man’s mind;
you do not know what’s happening in that man’s heart;
you do not know what’s happening in his energy.
You don’t know all these things
but at least the physical reality you have perceived,
you are wakeful to that point.
Suppose you feel little drowsy,
then you find you don’t know
what I am talking about.
Did it happen?
(Questioner): It happens sometimes.
(Sadhguru): Suppose you feel little drowsy,
what’s happened? –
Your wakefulness has come to a lower grade.
Because your wakefulness has come to a lower grade,
do you see I am talking but you are not perceiving?
Yes or no?
Ears are still open, isn’t it?
Nobody plugged it.
Sound is definitely going and hitting the eardrums. Isn’t it so?
What I speak is anyway going and hitting the eardrums or no?
It is, but still you are not perceiving
because your wakefulness has gone one level lower than it is right now.
So if it can get lower, you can also get it higher,
isn’t it, logically?
So if your wakefulness move into higher and higher dimensions,
if it has to get there,
you have to crank up your energy.
If your energy,
life energy moves into higher levels of intensity
your wakefulness moves into higher dimensions of wakefulness.
As your wakefulness moves into higher levels of dimensions,
higher dimensions,
your perception becomes clearer and clearer
and the penetration of your perception deepens.
Once the penetration of your perception deepens,
it changes the very quality of your experience.
Right now you sit here,
there is just a man sitting next to you.
Suppose your wakefulness becomes such,
everything that’s happening within him you know right now,
now your experience of sitting here is very different, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Does it make it clear?
Now if you try to raise your wakefulness, it’ll not happen;
if you try to increase your perception it’ll not happen;
if you try to widen your experience it’ll not happen.
The only thing that is in your hands is
you can crank up the intensity of your life energies.
You can only work on raising the voltage;
you cannot work on increasing the light, can you?
Even physically,
can you try to increase the penetration of light?
But you can work on raising the voltage, isn’t it?
If you raise the voltage
all these other things will naturally happen.
Sadhguru: Ohoo!
Only your neighbors should see whether your daughter
or your child is a girl or a boy.
You should never see whether this is a girl or a boy
It’s the first thing
Neighborhood boys will see that this is a girl,
that’s okay
You should not be wondering
whether this is a boy or a girl,
this is just a child.
And the best thing you can do for your child is
if you think the way you are is everything,
naturally your aspiration will be they should become like you,
which will be a backward step for next generation of people.
What the next generation should be –
what you cannot imagine,
that’s what they should be.
If you mold them
how will you mold them?
Like yourself,
and maybe your parents were better at molding than you,
so you will do a worse job than them
Because probably your mother, your father
at least for your mother maybe it was a fulltime job molding business
you’re part-time molder,
we can imagine what you will do.
Don’t try to mold them.
Just a child needs
a stable,
pleasant atmosphere to grow –
to create a joyful
I’m saying first joyful,
first joyful then loving, do you understand?
Otherwise this just bloody sappy love
without any joy and bliss around it is
will make people miserable over a period of time.
First joyful atmosphere,
if you’re capable of holding it
then you can add little bit of your love to it.
Children will need your love and attention
till they are five, six, seven,
after that they want to distance themselves,
they want to become their own thing
and it’s fine.
If you just… your… your only business is to keep them
in a very joyful and loving incubator.
Of course there’ll be somebody else on the street
who’ll be trying to do something else with them.
Those influences are always there,
you should not protect them entirely from those things because
someday they have to get out.
But your business is not to mold them.
One thing your child should not become is,
they should not become like you.
They should become something more than you,
what you are, isn’t it?
Your idea of something more is
they must earn more than you,
they must have a bigger car,
bigger house –
this is unfortunate.
If you are this joyful they should become more joyful than you.
If you are this intelligent
they should become more intelligent than you.
If you’re this balanced they must be
far more balanced than you.
Yes?
Hmm?
If your life is this rich, their life must be much richer
richness not …your… richness of your child’s life
or your life for that matter should
never, never be a contribution from what you have.
What you have gathered should never enhance your life,
please get this for yourself and your child.
Who you are, is who you are.
What you have is to what extent it’s useful to us,
we’ll have those things, everything.
Whatever we can use and enjoy we will have
but never try to enhance your life,
never try to enhance who you are by what you wear,
by we… where you live, what you own
these things should be useful.
You use them to the limit, no problem
but they should not enhance who you are.
Who you are should happen from within you.
If your child grows into this,
whatever he or she becomes it’s fine,
they need not be like you.
Once you don’t have this problem that they do
they don’t have to be like you,
then you will see it’s such a joy and freedom
to raise your child.
Your only struggle is they’re not like you.
Yes?
Daily struggles with the children is just this,
they are not shaping up like you.
How glad I am
So I think this is a very important point that you've just made and that we do have a very
Unique position now in history where we have the capability to do some of the things I think that we've all been thinking of
Which is to create I guess what I'd call a health revolution
We certainly need one here in the united States, and I'm just you talked earlier about a culture of health
And I'm just wondering what you think might be ways that we in the United States
can take advantage of some of the Wizards wisdom of
Traditional Indian culture
to help create a health Revolution here I
Think one fundamental thing that we have to fix about this wisdom business is
Wherever I go people say ancient wisdom
No wisdom has to be contemporary
The ancient wisdom will not work
there are some
Aspects of wisdom which are timeless anytime they're relevant
But many things which were very relevant a thousand years ago are not relevant today
There are certain fundamentals
Which are always relevant so let's look at only that for that the first and foremost thing the way you're talking
essentially about help a
Little bit of we have to produce a user's manual
for this most sophisticated gadget that we have a
User's Manual, what is the nature?
How does it function when I want to talk about this see if you as much turn your hands around?
The way you Breed will change
Most human beings have not noticed it if you simply turn it around
The way your breathing will alter the tell
So do because it is like you've been given a super
Sophisticated computer, but you are in still Caveman's Mindset you want to beat it into action somehow
So this is the essential problem the reason why let's say taking united states as an example
this is not going to be the problem of only United States United States has
Come first in the race
Okay
Others will get it because they are all going the same way
Right now u.s. Is a stop example
One thing is we go on
raising the bar for survival
We must define this is survival this means you're good enough
After this it must be exploration of what you really wish to do
But we keep on raising the bar of survival in such a way
Now even after becoming the most affluent nation a whole lot of people are just struggling for survival
this is senseless an
Affluent affluence means your survival is daunting isn't it?
But like you just mentioned
There is working three jobs to survive
There is no turbulence. This is horrible Poverty at least in India we can sit back and enjoy
the way we have structured the society right now is
people have a 35 year house mortgage I
Mean if you have a 35 years economic commitment to something
tomorrow even if
God popped up here. You can't change the direction of your life because the bank is here
What will you do because largely you're all from Christian community, so I am saying
If jesus popped up tomorrow, and he says come follow me
You're not going
Because not doing yoga we got monkey payment
Is that base to pay insurance to pay you can't change this is a silly way of organizing our lives
The question the very reason why we want to become affluent is
so that
Depending upon what life offers us. We can change the direction of our life whenever we want isn't it
Isn't it very important?
This is one thing that has to sink into the American people being the most affluent nation means
You are not battling for survival
This is happening because you are raising the bar of survival endlessly no matter what you do. You're still only fighting for survival
If this one thing will change then we can do lot of things about health and well-being and Beyond that
you
(Sadhguru): See probably in this part of the world,
if I utter the word prayer,
immediately people will think
sitting down and saying something
to somebody up there.
Some of you may know simple English prayers,
some of you may know complicated Latin,
Arabic,
Sanskrit
whatever kind of prayers.
But essentially prayer unfortunately has been understood as a way
like it’s some kind of a long-distance call.
Prayer is not an act,
it’s a certain quality that you bring in to your life.
In somewhere in 1860s
certain missionaries came to central part of India
which is now called as Madhya Pradesh
and they were scouting the tribal districts
because that is where the potential conversions are there.
Then they heard there is a particular yogi
around whom thousands of people are gathering.
So, they thought he build a some kind of a church
and people are gathering,
let’s go and see.
Competition, you know!
So they went there,
when they went there
they couldn’t believe this,
there was no Church,
there were not even a home,
the yogi was just sitting under a tree.
All he had was a loin cloth,
bare bodied,
he was just sitting there;
somebody who looks like
he’s not worth anything
and they got little encouraged.
Okay, there’s not much of a competition
but then they found
hundreds and thousands of people gathering around him.
Then they were amazed
oh what’s happening here,
he must be having some kind of power.
So,
when they got an appointment with him
they asked what kind of prayers do you teach.
Then he looked at them and laughed and said,
Oh you are men of cloth,
you are men of prayer aren’t you?
You have done much prayer obviously in your life.
Today, you just see some prayer,
don’t do it just see it.
They said how can we see prayer.
He said just watch me now
and he took some vegetables and started cutting.
He said,
this is my prayer just watch it,
quite carefully watch it.
This is the prayer.
So, prayer is not just vocal
prayer is a way of involving your whole body
and getting it into a certain attitude of receptivity,
of seeing.
Prayer is essentially seeing that
your presence here is so miniscule actually.
You are just a speck of dust in this existence,
tomorrow morning woof if you disappear
nobody is going to miss you.
A few people around you will cry for three days
and then they will forget about you.
Rest of the existence will just go on fine without you, isn’t it?
All of this disappear,
still this world will go on wonderfully well,
maybe better (laughter).
Yes or no.
This self-assumed importance that man has created within himself,
when you keep it aside you are in prayer.
If you manage to keep aside
the assumed importance that you have for yourself,
then you are in prayer,
you don’t have to say anything.
Sadhguru: Human memory is a fabulous thing;
it's because of this ability to remember
we have science,
we have technology,
we have a civilization,
we have information technology;
it's all about memory, isn't it?
But at the same time
it's human memory
which is the source of all bondage.
What you call as karma is just memory
on different levels of life.
Memory is like a doorway;
a doorway can open but also it can close.
If doors open for you,
you experience doors as beautiful things.
If doors close in your face
you always remember doors as horrible things.
Isn't it so?
In your life
if doors are opening for you wherever you go,
you see door as a very wonderful thing
but if it's always slamming in your face
door is a horrible thing.
Memory is just like this.
Memory is what has given us the ability to be informed;
it is because we are capable of making ourselves informed
about various things
many beautiful things have happened in our lives,
many.
The very basis of civilization is memory.
Today what goes as learning is simply memory, isn't it?
Memory transmitted from generation to generation;
that is how if your father knew how to do one stitch
you learnt how to make the second stitch
and your children learnt the third stitch;
this is how things have happened.
But if you did not remember the first stitch,
reinventing the wheel all the time,
nothing would have happened, isn't it?
Just intelligence would not have led to civilization;
memory is important.
At the same time
memory also makes your life repetitive
not receptive,
simply repetitive.
When you carry a certain volume of memory within you
life becomes repetitive,
automatic.
All sense of being human,
all the possibilities of being spontaneous,
all the possibility of exploring new terrain
in one’s life
gets obliterated because of memory.
As I said, it's like a doorway.
It all depends
whether it's opening for you
or closing for you.
When people try to learn by shear memory
many things happen
and lot of so-called culture and civilization is a product of that
shear memory,
not much intelligence in it.
Together they are a deadly combination.
Just memory is simply a repetitiveness.
One of the Isha meditators
from United States
wanted to come to India.
Last four years he’s been planning and planning
but he has a cat that he loves
and to leave the cat for more than two weeks
and come to India has been very difficult.
You know the cat?
He divorced his wife
about six years ago.
So he has no such problems
but the cat.
Slowly he became little more dispassionate
and he decided to come.
So he handed his cat over to his brother
and then he travelled to India.
Landed at the Chennai airport.
The moment he cleared the customs,
first thing he did was
he borrowed a volunteer’s phone who had come to receive
the US meditators who are landing that day
and he said,
‘I need to make a call to United States.’
‘Okay.’
So he called his brother
and he… first thing he asked,
‘How is the cat?’
The brother said, ‘Cat is dead.’
He said, ‘
what
cat dead?
He screamed and yelled and cried
and then he said,
‘Okay it's dead;
we can always get another cat
but don’t you have any sensitivity?
Couldn’t you say in a gentler way?
Simply barking
cat is dead.
Is there no sensitivity at all in you?’
Then the brother asked,
‘Okay, what was I supposed to say?
It's dead.
‘I can understand it's dead,
but couldn’t you say something;
couldn’t you say the cat went up to the roof top,
there it rained heavily
and he got soaked
and you called the fire brigade
and you went up and you got it down
and you put him
you took all the care;
put him in the cat hospital
but he got pneumonia
and he passed on
but peacefully;
something.
There is no sign of civilization in you.
What is this cat is dead?’
Then he said,
‘Okay next time I’ll try.’
Then he said, ‘Alright, how are you?’
He said, ‘I am doing well.’
‘How is mother?’
‘Well, she went up to the roof…’
Lot of civilization has become like this
because information that travels from generation to generation
gets stored in different ways
and so much distortion
and now you can't look at anything straight the way it is.
Minds get so deeply conditioned
that
you can't look at anything straight anymore.
So what you call as culture is just memory;
what you call as civilization is just memory;
memory is not useless,
memory is useful
but if you do not know how to keep it aside
that becomes your biggest bondage
because life becomes repetitive.
When you are repetitive
you cannot be receptive.
Manisha Koirala:one question that really comes to me
very strongly is that we, you know,
India and Nepal is very rich in culture
and spiritual heritage.
Instead of taking pride,
why do we always look towards West?
And whereas I find lot of West
is looking towards us for answers,
but we,
I feel, are constantly looking towards West.
Your views on this, Guruji.
Sadhguru: I’m sure at least almost all the men –
ninety-five percent of the men –
are in Western clothes right now.
Ladies are a little better (Laughter).
Why is this?
Because we must understand,
there is no substitute for success.
You may talk philosophies,
you may talk culture,
you may talk so many things,
but there is no substitute for success.
Right now,
in many ways,
West has become the symbol of success.
So if you’re successful,
even though the temperatures are thirty-eight degrees today,
you must be in jacket and tie (Few laugh).
I’m not commenting on their clothes,
I’m saying success is the ideal always.
Without
What is successful,
that is what everybody will aspire for.
So we need to understand this.
Another aspect of success is today,
success means economic success.
People are not recognizing any other form of success
anymore on the planet.
There used to be a time,
if you came into a town and said,
“Oh, he’s a big man,”
maybe he was a wise man,
maybe he was a very creative man,
maybe he was something else.
But no, today if you say somebody is a big man,
it means he’s got big moneybags.
So, in a way we have transformed the entire world
into economics,
that is the most important subject everywhere.
So it doesn’t matter.
There’s no point struggling with it.
We have to come to terms with it
and see how to ride it.
So we need economic success.
You’ll see, as India becomes more economically successful,
you will see
things Indian will become more prominent.
It's not the other way round.
People think that if India becomes economically successful,
everybody will become Westernized.
It's not true,
unless by then we have completely lost the ethos of
what India is.
If we did not lose that, then definitely,
as economic success comes,
manifesting who we are becomes equally important.
To take pride,
there are certain mechanics.
First of all, when you
you mentioned the word nation,
nation is not just a geographical boundary.
It is an idea that
we must infuse into people’s minds.
It must burn as a pride in people’s hearts,
then only there is a nation.
If you just draw a pencil line on the map,
it doesn’t become a nation.
So to build pride, there is
there has to be history.
No nation has as much history as we have.
But our (Laughs) children as
When you were studying in school,
you studied nothing of
to be proud of.
If you just look at it
Recently, I was talking to the Education Minister in Tamil Nadu.
For example,
everybody knows about Cambodia,
Angkor Thom and Angkor Wat.
These temples are the engineering marvels –
even by today’s standards,
most incredible things
that human beings can create.
Tamil kings went there and built it.
From first standard to twelfth standard,
does any Tamil child
even read one line
saying that our ancestors went there
and built this?
No.
We only study
how people came and conquered us,
raped us,
looted us
and this is what we study.
A fourth standard child in Lebanon will know –
fourth, fifth standard,
those three years they study this -
every one of them know
Indian labor,
Indian sculptors,
Indian yogis and Indian elephants came to Lebanon
4200 years ago
and built the Baalbek temple,
which is a phenomenal structure even today.
Every child in Lebanon knows it,
to a point there are thousands of people in Lebanon,
who take their first name as Hind.
Here we shout Jai Hind,
there’s no one “hind” here.
But in Lebanon,
there are thousands of people named Hind
because they feel these people from somewhere
came and built this temple and even today,
there are thousands of people by that name.
you go to Palmyra,
Aleppo,
Damascus.
All these places are living history
that over 8-10,000 years ago,
these cities were built
by taxing Indian traders –
by taxing them.
So you can imagine
what is the volume of traffic
that must have been happening
to build entire cities based on the tax
that was collected from the Indian traders.
Ask any Indian child,
have they read anything about it?
No.
Nothing of pride.
So, I (Laughs) must tell you this,
I’m not saying this with pleasure
but today, if the Western countries open up their visa regimes,
I think seventy percent of the Indians
will swim across the oceans and go away.
So you’re not running a nation,
you’re running a open prison.
Nation is when
“I want to be here and make things happen” –
this is a nation.
“I want to run away.
Because there’s no other way, I’m staying here” –
this is not a nation.
If we want to make a nation,
we have to build that pride.
Pride will not suddenly drop upon us from the skies.
We have to show our children
what all great things we have done in the past.
Okay, we have fallen here and there,
but now it's once again time to bring back that glory.
If we don’t create that pride,
if we don’t create a sense of history in people’s minds,
particularly growing children and youth,
how will you build… bring pride?
First opportunity they get,
they will leave the country (Laughs).
See,
going out of the country is not a bad thing.
You go there to learn,
you go do… to do business,
you go there to do whatever.
But are you running away
from a horrible situation,
or are you going by choice -
that is the question.
I’m not saying nobody should go out.
We have enough population
to populate the entire world,
so we can go out (Laughter).
Going out is not a crime.
I’m saying we are escaping.
Escape happens from a prison,
not from a nation, isn't it?
So, the
this sense of escaping from the country,
that should go away.
If that has to go away,
we cannot be forever talking about
our past glory either.
Past glory is good to build pride,
to create a present and a future.
We have to do that.
Right now, India, as a nation,
is in a position of advantage
only because of the demographic dividend we have.
In everything else, we are way behind most nations,
let's understand this.
We are.
But we have a … demographic dividend,
that we have the maximum number of youth.
But if we do not cash in on this
in the next fifteen to twenty years,
once again it’ll be a slide down.
It may take another fifty years
or hundred years
before we get that opportunity once again.
So right now,
in the next ten to fifteen years,
what we do matters
for you and the future generations of this land.
Sadhguru: Here we are at Hampi
historically this has been one of the greatest cities
that ever happened in India.
And many travelers,
Portuguese,
Italians,
Chinese
and people from Arabia
many travelers have described this city as
‘the greatest city of the time in the world.’
An Italian traveler comes down to say that
‘it is far bigger and greater than Rome.’
The city covered over sixty miles of circumference;
among these beautiful rocks,
which still remains
and exudes an aura of fascination,
an aura of magical presence,
I …I cannot wonder
why they would’ve chosen a place to set up a city like this
in these rocks
because in terms of defenses and the magical presence of these rocks
the place is full of rocks,
probably we will show you some shots later.
It's…it's a rocky, rocky place
magnificent rocks,
a whole lot of them have been broken to build structures and temples
but still the live rocks which are just sitting all over the place
creates such a magical atmosphere even today.
This place has a historicity,
which goes back into 4000 year BC.
There are caves where,
even today there are images and carvings in the caves
which are over 4000 years old.
And Agastyamuni himself seems to have come.
We can say in many ways
because he stepped in here and did something significant here,
from then on there’s been no looking for this place.
There’s been rise and fall,
rise and fall
but it rose to its height, true heights
during thirteenth, fourteenth century
during the great Krishnadevaraya Era,
when it was called as the Vijayanagar Empire.
Somewhere in early fourteenth century,
two brothers who are known as Hakka and Bukka
or Harihara and Bukka,
who were governors in the Kakatiya Empire
learned the art of administration and stuff
and then they decided to come here
and set up their own kingdom.
This region was continuously in warfare
between the Vellals of the Karnataka
and the Bahmani Sultanate,
where the northern mogul emperors were trying to go south.
In many ways - for two hundred plus years
the Vijayanagar Empire became a bulwark
to stop the flow of Islamic invasions into the south.
That is one reason that the influence
and the dominance of Islam remained minimal in the south
and Vijayanagar Empire was mainly responsible for making that happen
because they organized their armies
and this is one empire,
probably the only one in the country
which controlled both the coasts for a period of time.
From coast to coast,
from east coast to west coast
entirely they controlled the territory.
.
So the sea-trade was dominated by these people
Probably no other Indian king or emperor
ever controlled the sea-trade as Vijayanagar did,
and they dominated the place
and they brought in European and Arabic
Arabian goods into the country
and they traded extensively with Asia, Arabia and Europe
So this whole empire existed in such a phenomenal way at that time
The glory of it we still cannot miss it
One thing is,
there is a story about how this happened -
these two brothers came
and they were captured by the Islamic sultanate
and taken to Delhi.
And they were
they converted themselves to Islam.
For over fifteen years they lived as Muslim…devout Muslims
because that was the only way for them to survive.
Then they were brought back here to take charge of this place
and rule this place
as representatives of Delhi sultanate
and then they met Sage Vidyaranya.
and they formed the first step
the first foundation stone for the Vijayanagar Empire was laid like this.
How they chose this place is interesting.
This place called Anegundi -
we are just little off that place right now.
Here, when Vidyaranya and the two brothers came,
they went hunting with their dogs
and there were five dogs and a hare
there was a hare
these five dogs, the king’s dogs attacked him.
The strange thing that they saw was
normally a hare would be killed in moments
if these five dogs go at him
but this particular hare stood up and fought the five dogs
and kind of the dogs backed off
looking at the fierceness of the hare.
Then they decided that
this is the place where they should establish their kingdom,
and from that basis
and from that kind of symbolism
that it doesn’t matter who you are,
if you’re willing to stand up and make these things happen,
you can fight back and build it.
From that basis they built this great empire,
which stretched across the southern peninsula,
covering the whole of Deccan - coast to coast
Sadhguru: Prediction,
what’s going to happen to future?
See
if
if my whole thing was to make a prediction,
then why would we do all this work.
It doesn’t matter how bleak the situation looks like now
but don’t ever underestimate
what is in a human heart,
what people really want,
don’t underestimate that.
In ten years’ time,
the whole world just may just be changed into a complete different possibility.
It’s just that people need sufficient poking
to get them going
but when they get going,
you don’t know what they can do.
They can do something that’s never happened in the planet till now, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
So, don’t try to predict future.
See what kind of future do you want to create.
Why are we always trying to predict future?
I want you to set a goal;
before I die, I want to leave the world at least this much better.
Wouldn’t that be better
instead of predicting future.
Why don’t you set a goal for yourself
before I leave this world, I will make at least this good.
If all of us set a goal like that,
definitely there’s a wonderful future ahead, isn’t it?
We are hoping from the stars some guidance will come.
Stars are dumb inanimate rocks, okay?
You are supposed to have brains and intelligence,
they don’t have all that.
They are just far away
but they are just dumb unintelligent rocks, isn’t it so?
Yes or no,
just because they are far away
we don’t have to attach such an importance to them.
They are not guiding our lives,
human destiny is in human hands;
how we handle it that’s what it will become.
If we handle it sensibly,
definitely there’s a wonderful tomorrow.
If you handle it foolishly,
definitely there’s going to be terrible tomorrow, isn’t it?
So, don’t predict.
Predictions means an insult to humanity.
All predictions are terrible insult to humanity, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
That means there is no value for what a human being is.
All this nonsense is happening
simply because you have not realized the immensity of being human,
how big it is to be human being is not being realized.
The very wonderful stories in India you must have heard.
In India, there are stories like this
if Gods have any problems,
they get into trouble,
they will come down to meet the sages and saints
for advice and consultancy.
You know that.
This is just to tell you
human being can raise himself to such a stage
that even the gods will have to seek advice from him,
just to tell you
the immensity of being human what it means.
So, if you realize the immensity of being a human being,
then you won’t predict you will create.
We just have to create, not predict.
Sadhguru: Peace is not the ultimate goal of life.
It is the most fundamental requirement.
If you hold it as the ultimate goal in your life,
you will only rest in peace.
If you want to enjoy your dinner tonight
or a walk in the park
or the people around you,
Once you are identified with something that you are not
mind is like an express train that you cannot stop.
now you want to apply brakes
your handbag,
your money
your identitity card
the relationships
the heaviness in your heart
your very body
or things you have accumulated over a period of time
as this process of disidentification grows within you
counter balanced by a very deep sense of involvement
in everything that you do
you will move from madness to meditativeness
the word 'nadishuddhi' literally means cleansing the nadis
when we say nadis we are not talking about the 72000
because these 72000 are only a branch of the two basic nadis
the pingala and the eda
Sadhguru: I don’t even think it’s an issue,
either it’s now or in the past.
It’s never been an issue.
If somebody exhibited a certain level competence and success,
nobody is looking at your age
Nobody is really considering the age at any time.
Age was a factor when you were waiting to inherit something from your father
he wouldn’t leave it till he is done with it, okay?
If you wanted to build something,
I don’t think age is a factor (Laughter)...
Anybody who successfully does something, irrespective of his age,
he is always recognized;
nobody is even thinking whether he is young or old
that’s a wrong notion.
You must just focus on what you can create.
Your age matters only if you are looking at marriage,
do you understand
if you are looking at any other accomplishment,
I don’t see where age even comes in.
I don’t think somebody has to think
‘I’m a young leader,
I’m an old leader.’
Are you capable of doing something that’ll inspire a million people?
Are you capable of doing something that
millions of people will want to make use of?
This is all the question is.
Who cares how old you are?
It is within the minds of people who have not succeeded.
It is those who have not succeeded who are complaining.
Those who have succeeded are just focusing on what they need to do, isn’t it (Laughs)?
(Sadhguru): So when a yogi uses bhasm or vibhuthi
vibhuthi means
the word vibhuthi means
one who has attained a certain capability is a vibhuthi.
So ash is being referred to as that which has attained a certain capability.
Ash is made in different ways.
A yogi always uses ash from a cremation ground.
So all the stories that you hear about
how Adiyogi always resided in the cremation ground
is because
– you’re looking terrified Maa.
You…not you are okay?
Cremation ground is okay,
all of us will make use of the service some day.
Okay.
You may not go to a restaurant,
you may not go to a disco,
you may not go to a your golf course
but we will all go… make use of that one service, isn't it?
Yes? (Laughs)
Other things by choice;
this we will make use, isn't it?
So
there’s nothing to be terrified about.
It's a place we have to go.
So better go gracefully, isn't it? (Laughs)
So always these stories about
how he hung around cremation grounds
It is not that always he lived there
it is just after morning shower
they went to the cremation ground
looking for ashes for the day.
for house-holders,
people who are holding on to their houses; (Few laugh)
for house-holders we made other kind of ash.
We made it from the next best thing that we did was cow-dung;
we burned it and made ash.
This is also good, it does certain things.
It opens up your receptivity in a certain way.
So we said ‘don’t apply it all over your body,
just in certain points.’
If that is also difficult
then we did rice bran otherwise we did sesame seed ash;
like this we produce more and more benign things.
But when Adiyogi used
he used cremation ground ashes.
Even today many yogis use only that.
But you should not do, that
unless you’re properly initiated into the process
and you know what to do with it
and if certain things happen you know what to do with it.
for you the simple ash either made out of cowdung or rice bran
when you apply
if you go into a space which is energetically charged in some way
if you apply it between your eyebrows
there is a spot
you must know this exact spot
there is a spot behind your ears
if you apply on those two sides
and the pit of your throat
and where the ribcase meets just beneath that
the idea is you want the higher aspects of who you are become receptive.
See right now to put the example very basically
I want you to understand this,
don’t react to these things –
now let us say you are a man.
A woman came in front of you.
It is not just the eyes,
the whole body responds, okay?
It depends who it is, what it is.
Now if you look at her in a certain way,
you may think it's your mother.
If you look at her in another way you may be drawn to her sexually.
If you look at her in another way
you may be repelled because it reminds you of something.
Reminder need not be necessarily in the mind,
it's all over the body.
So now you’re walking on the street,
you don’t want to get entangled in all these things.
If you see anything
you want to receive this in a highest possible way.
So you apply vibhuthi to make those parts more sensitive
so that your receptivity is in the higher dimension of life
not on the lower dimension of life.
When I say lower
I am not talking in terms of
hierarchy, high and low;
I am talking geographically lower in your body, okay.
It is not a question of morality,
it is not a question of right and wrong;
it is a question of entanglement.
If you receive from higher dimensions within you,
there is no entanglement.
If you receive the same thing from lower dimensions,
the same thing will become entangling in process.
So because you want to be in a place
where you’re moving towards your liberation
not towards your entanglement
you make the higher aspects of your body more receptive.
Even all the women are,
you know the Indian women are supposed to put a red-spot
to make them receptive here
not somewhere else.
If some other part of the body receives
it response in a different way.
if it receives here it response in a different way.
They must be using this red thing made out of turmeric
but now they’re putting a plastic patch
and making sure it is sealed. (Laughs)
Really.
You’re supposed to apply kumkum which is made out of turmeric,
do you know this?
But now they’re applying either chemical powder
or many of them are sealing it with a plastic patch.
It's a band-aid (Laughs),
colored band-aid.
You can fix on your forehead.
The idea is
that receptivity happens in the highest center for you
because how you receive something determines the nature of your life.
What you receive is important too
but how you receive it is vital important.
See you could get poisoned with life in so many ways.
You went somewhere,
the way you responded to somebody or something
could make or break your life, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Many times the way you respond to a certain human being
or a certain situation
could either make your life or break your life.
Some people make it;
some people break it, isn't it?
So a little control over that
just by making the higher aspects more receptive
so that your –
the lower aspects of your body are reactionary,
they react –
this is a response;
it’ll give you a chance to respond to it sensibly
rather than simply reacting.
When you simply react you get enslaved and entangled to many things.
When you respond you’re living your life by choice.

Sadhguru: We have cells and cells
over hundred billion cells, they say.
All these cells are essentially coded
and you know,
geared for health –
for survival mainly,
their own individual survival
and the survival of the organism.
A few of them take shortcuts.
They want to survive upon others.
It's crime, you know.
So there is a pickpocket.
What is his business?
What you took one month to earn,
he wants to pick it up in one day.
But he is also part of the society
till he’s caught, all right (Laughs)?
Now, if all the pickpockets of the country
got together and they came to Delhi,
now everybody’s pockets will be gone
because now it's organized.
So right now,
what you call as cancer is just this.
In everybody’s body,
there are cancerous cells.
When they get organized and get focused in one place,
then it becomes a serious problem,
to a point where it can take one’s life.
What is the solution?
There are many things to say.
First of all,
crime flourishes
where there is no order in the system.
Yes?
Criminals in the society will flourish
if the law enforcement is not in order.
So there is a defense mechanism in our system.
Are we keeping it well?
Are we bombarding it
with all kinds of stimulants,
intoxicants, everything
and then we’re expecting our defense mechanism to work.
It won't work like that.
We must understand,
every stimulant and every intoxicant we consume,
in some way dents our defense mechanism.
People think defense mechanism is only for external infections.
No,
even to contain the internal criminals in the body,
the defense mechanism works.
So a simple thing is – you know,
in the yogic system this is a simple logic –
these cancerous cells in our body,
they consume usually about
twenty-seven to twenty-eight times of food
than the normal cells.
So, if you space out your meal –
an ideal spacing between one meal and the next in the yogic culture is
eight to twelve hours –
if you space out eight hours meals,
you will see the cancerous cells will all die by themselves
because they cannot survive without food.
Other cells will survive.
So always we fixed it,
morning one meal,
evening one meal,
no in-between eating.
And once in a way, every month,
twice a month
or once a month,
people are practicing one full day no food.
These are simple ways to control this.
Apart from that,
there are various other things.
Above all, if your mind and body is in a certain ease,
these will not survive.
If your mind and body is in a certain sense of strife,
then these will survive –
and not only survive, they will flourish.
If the society is in strife,
organized crimes rise.
If the society is in order,
very little crime happens.
The same is true with our physiological structure.
Sadhguru: Good evening everyone.
Juhi Chawla: Good evening everyone.
Sadhguru: Nobody is saying anything (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) No they are all here but they are very silent.
They are all waiting for it all to begin
and let me tell you… I have to confess,
as I came on -
before this I was quite relaxed -
but as I’ve come on to the stage, my heart is beating really fast.
So, (Laughs) while Guruji was praying,
I was saying to myself, “I must be relaxed. This is the time.
When I am with my Guru, I must be relaxed that this is it.”
So, yes I will calmly begin by thanking you Sadhguruji,
for giving me this opportunity to be in conversation with you.
Isha Foundation, thank you very much.
Sadhguru: I… I thought when we are talking about ‘Of love and life,’
heart beating is a good thing (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Okay, yes it’s a good thing.
It shows I’m alive and in love and about to begin this conversation.
And Sadhguruji, I want to say,
I have attended your Inner Engineering program,
I have seen some DVDs,
I have read your books.
And everywhere there are your brilliant views on various issues.
It could be from the making of a nation
to the making of a toy car,
from the running of a household to the running of parliament.
You have brilliant views on every issue that one can ever question.
Yet I know very little about you
and it
You know here’s a brilliant mind with an… for lack of better words,
I would say ‘out-of-the-Box’ thinking -
so different,
so refreshing,
so enlightening.
I am fascinated and I want to know about your life.
And I’d like to know that
I mean,
were you just born brilliant?
Did it begin from that very moment?
Sadhguru: I was a normal birth.
I didn’t come in a box (Laughter).
My mother had a normal child.
Juhi Chawla: No, you know,
I’m from the movies and I can’t help thinking –
was it like it is in story books,
that a venerable sage came to your home
and when he looked at your mother,
he said (Laughter),
“There is going to be born a Guru. Rejoice.
He will lighten his own path and that of others?
Sadhguru: You also… You also going like this? (Laughter)
Juhi Chawla: No, but was it like that or how was it?
How was your childhood?
Sadhguru: I don’t think they all came to listen to my mother’s labor pains (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: No, I’m really fascinated,
intrigued that we’re all here
but you know, the way you think,
we wait to hear what you have to say.
We’ve all been little children
and we’ve all grown up
but we’ve grown up and been educated in schools and
but I find our way of thinking,
our way of being very conditioned,
like almost systematized.
Whereas,
so where …where did it all begin?
Sadhguru: I think you’re looking for something unnatural that happened there (Laughs).
One thing that could be considered unnatural was
it seems I was a very delayed birth.
My mother went to the hospital three times and came back
and she gave up that he’s not coming (Laughter).
And when it actually happened, it happened at home.
My father being a physician, that was not possible,
she… she had to be in the hospital.
Three times she went and three times it didn’t happen.
They did everything possible and she gave up,
so it happened at home.
So, that’s the only reasonably unnatural thing.
Everything else was natural – birth,
I didn’t come in a box (Juhi Laughs).
And I refused to be educated (Laughs).
So, what is
I mean the question that you’re asking is,
do people grow up and blossom
or are they brought up by somebody?
You will see the general expression is,
“I was brought up in this place,
I was brought up in that way.”
Especially in the West, you will see,
“I was brought up Christian”,
“I was brought up Jewish”
these are very common words.
I think it’s absolutely ridiculous and humiliating
that a human being has to be brought up.
You bring up cattle, okay?
You don’t bring up a human being.
A human being is supposed to blossom by his own nature.
That is why he’s on the top of the pile,
at least on this planet, in the evolutionary scale.
And most human beings don’t seem to understand that
or they are not allowed to understand that by a whole lot of people
and they need to be brought up.
Bringing up means somebody is molding you.
Molding means it’s a predetermined shape.
And no flower that blossoms is the same way as another one,
which blossomed yesterday.
But a mold means it’s always going to be the same.
If you make a mold,
the idea of making a mold is that we want to have the same form,
again and again and again.
Right now, generally that seems to be the work
unfortunately of the current education system,
the so-called religions that are operating in the world
and of course the family.
They want you to be in a certain mold,
they don’t want you to blossom like a wild flower
because they’re afraid of anything fresh happening among them.
They want something that is familiar.
They don’t want something unfamiliar to be born among them.
So, if you have succumbed to that system,
then yes, you’ve been molded into a certain form.
If you allow your humanity to blossom,
then you will see, you don’t belong to any mold.
This is the beauty of being human that there is no a particular way to be.
If you were a dog you would be one way,
if you were cattle you would be one way,
if you were a sheep you would be another way,
if you’re bird - another way, a grasshopper - another way.
But to be human means there is no particular way.
What is human is not defined, nor described,
it is… it is just that
for every other creature on this planet,
nature drew two lines;
within that they have to play their game.
For a human being, only the bottom line is drawn,
there is no top line.
But socially, people are trying to draw a top line for themselves.
But nature has not drawn a top line for you,
it’s a limitless possibility
and this is what is freaking human beings right now.
Because they can’t decide what they can (Laughs)… need to be.
They’re trying to be like somebody else.
Only bottom line is set, top line has been removed
this is evolution.
Juhi Chawla: But wait, we still didn’t quite get to
So how was it when you were a child,
were you… were you put into a school to go the systematic way
and did you keep up with it
Sadhguru: Do I… Do I look that edu… educated?
Don’t insult me like that (Laughter).
Actually you know, when I go and stand in the line
in the immigration lines, in particularly in America,
they look at me and say, “Can you speak English?”
I say (Nods his head affirmatively) (Laughter)
because I have that uneducated look, it’s not easy (Laughter).
Do you know
Do you know what it takes to remain uneducated?
Education is just twenty years of going somewhere and getting one certificate.
To remain uneducated, it’s very difficult
because from the day you’re born,
your parents, every other adult, the school, the damn thing
everybody is trying to educate you
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: …about something that’s not worked in their life (Laughter &amp; Applause).
Juhi Chawla: And then did you also, like we all went through these confused teenage years
of not really knowing where we’re going,
I mean did you clearly know your path?
Sadhguru: Not at all.
I was, right from three or four years of age,
I was always a million questions hanging in… in my head.
I have a question about everything -
everything to everything.
Questions means, very fundamental questions about existence itself,
my own existence.
So, when I was three, four years of age,
suddenly I realized I know nothing.
Know nothing means –
somebody gives me a glass of water, I do not know what is water.
I know how to use it, I know if I drink it,
it will quench my thirst and so many other ways of using it
but I do not know what is water.
I’m saying even today, you do not know what is water.
It’s the only thing available in all three states on the planet.
Three… two thirds of the planet is water,
two thirds of your body is water.
If we think life, we think water.
But do you know what it is?
With all the scientific exploration,
we do not even know a single atom in its entirety.
Today, our idea of science is,
learning how to use everything.
Yes?
We know how to use an atom,
we know how to break it,
we know how to fuse it
but we really do not know what it is.
Any one thing, tiniest thing in the creation,
we do not know in its entirety,
this is the fact of life.
Juhi Chawla: Well even something simple as what you started with,
saying that looking at water.
I mean, straight away I was taught water - H2O
and what it can do and it
you can mix it with colors and it becomes that.
You can drink it and it quenches your thirst.
But I never looked at it and said you know,
“I don’t really know what is water.”
Sadhguru: Because nobody looks at anything.
See, everybody is looking like this,
nobody has any attention for a piece of life here.
They’re like this (Gestures).
If you pay attention to one life,
one blade of grass,
one grasshopper,
one human being,
something else will happen.
That’s why we said ‘life and love’
because if you pay attention to one human being,
some love will happen within you, okay?
If you miss life, at least some emotion in that direction must happen to you.
That will happen only if you pay attention to one.
If you’re looking at like this (Gestures)
These days it’s become a fashion because you’re in love on Facebook.
You love the whole humanity.
To love one human being
if you want to love one human being, it costs life.
To love the whole humanity, it doesn’t cost anything.
It’s even better to love God
because it’s always easy to love somebody who is not here now (Juhi Laughs),
it’s so easy.
But if you have to love somebody who is sitting next to you right now,
it costs life.
You know how difficult it is to love someone who is next to you right now,
how easy it is to love someone who is dead or who is in heaven?
Isn’t it so?
Let’s face it.
Because if you have to love one,
one thing is you have to pay attention.
Without attention, it will not happen.
And above all, you have to give up something that is you,
to accommodate another,
otherwise it will not happen.
The English expression, it’s very good –
“You must fall in love.”
You cannot rise in love,
you cannot stand in love,
you cannot fly in love,
you have to fall.
Something of you should fall, otherwise it will not work.
You will not know it.
So, you want to have a fake sense of life,
then you don’t pay attention to anything,
everything is information.
Nothing is a living experience.
Everything is from the textbook or from the cinema or from the internet.
Nothing is from life’s experience.
You’re doing more and more today of that.
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji, you just mentioned love
and today it is about ‘life and love’ and I would like to know,
for us it is maybe love your family members,
whoever it could be. I… I
Why I ask you this is because there’re so many versions of this
and I really want to get to it.
Some teachers,
some Gurus,
some guides will say you know,
“You can love but you must be detached…”
Sadhguru: Ohoho (Laughs)
Juhi Chawla: …you must love but it cannot be conditional.
It should be unconditional and
So, there’s versions of it,
I just want to know,
so have you….
Sadhguru: See, the simple… the simple way of make you keep coming back to me is
to give you something that you cannot do,
to give you a teaching which you can never do.
You must love, but you must be detached –
now you have to keep coming back to me for consultation (Laughter),
endlessly.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Sorry.
Sadhguru: I’m saying throw yourself into your love affair and die into it.
Something will happen.
Something worthwhile will happen if you’re willing to die into the process,
not just anything –
whether it’s your work or your life or your love or whatever,
if you do not know how to throw your entire self into it,
you will never know the taste of what it is.
“Love, but be detached”
what… why do you want to love then? (Laughter)
Only because you want to include somebody as a part of your life
part of yourself, that’s why you love.
“No, I love but I… I’m detached.”
This means you have to come back to consultation, every day.
It is like a psychiatrist’s job
everyday you have to come and sit on the couch.
You need treatment and there is a fee (Laughs).
Juhi Chawla: So… Okay all right,
so you can love and be attached
Sadhguru: No, no, I didn’t say that (Laughter)
Juhi Chawla: Okay, I’m coming back for consultation, please (Laughter).
So, what did you say?
Sadhguru: I only said,
see what is this need for love in a human being?
You must understand,
a human being constantly,
constantly,
a human being is longing to be something more than what they are right now.
If this finds a simple basic physical expression,
we call this sexuality.
Sexuality means just this
physically you’re trying to make something which is not you, a part of yourself.
For a few moments you may succeed.
If you try this mentally, it gets labeled as greed,
conquest or maybe simply shopping
shopping, shopping.
Juhi Chawla: Oh.
Sadhguru: Some people go for conquest with swords and guns,
some people go with cheque books and cash, you know credit cards.
The thing is you want to include something which is not a part of you as yourself
that is the whole effort. Tch,
whether you want money or wealth or you want to occupy a nation,
what is it?
Something that is not you, you want to make it yours.
Yours is an effort to make it a part of yourself.
If it happens emotionally, on the emotional level if you try this,
we call this a love affair.
You’re trying to make somebody who is not a part of you,
a part of yourself emotionally
this is a love affair.
If you do it consciously, we call this yoga.
Yoga means union.
So, all these efforts are fine,
everything has its own beauty but has its own limitations.
When you understand the limitations of all the other methods,
nothing right or wrong about it,
it is just that it will work briefly,
it will not work for always.
When you realize that, you consciously try to include.
When you consciously become an inclusive process,
if you sit here,
if you experience everything as yourself then we say you are a yogi, okay?
So, this is a love affair, successful.
Juhi Chawla: So something you said at the end
which I would like to ask you again
You said love, inclusiveness
I can’t understand how I can love everybody in this room.
Sadhguru: You cannot.
There are some people you cannot love (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: I can barely see, up there and up there.
So, how is tha… how do you include everybody in your love?
Sadhguru: See because you’re looking at love as something that comes to you
or you yield to the process of love,
only because you appreciate a particular quality
a shape of somebody’s nose or the shape of their mind
or their thought or their emotion or the way they speak
or the way they do things or the way they relate to you,
something, okay?
There’re many many things.
It is based on something that is acceptable to you.
If they do something that is not acceptable to you,
love crumbles.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Yes.
Sadhguru: Now what I’m saying is,
I want you to look at this –
whether love happens to you or hate happens to you,
anger happens to you, misery happens to you, joy happens to you
it only happens within you, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: It never… People say love is in the air,
no.
Because you are feeling very pleasant in your emotions,
suddenly air feels vibrant.
It always been, you missed it all your life,
now you’re beginning to feel it.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Okay. Okay.
Sadhguru: All right? So, whatever human experience –
love or hate, whatever, whatever –
happens only within you.
What I am saying is at least what happens within you must happen by your choice,
consciously you must be able to make it happen.
If you’re able to,
if your experience or what is happening within you is happening by choice,
what is the problem?
It only happens within you.
Love is not a relationship.
A relationship is a different thing.
Love is a certain sweetness of your emotion.
Whether you look at a tree or a dog or a man or a woman or a child or just at the sky,
why can’t you look at it lovingly?
Because it’s not about loving the sky,
it’s about the sweetness of your emotion.
If your emotions are sweet,
whatever you look at, you will look at it in a certain way.
Right now you have nasty emotions, whatever you look at,
you look at it in a different way.
So, you have always associated love with somebody.
No, no, no, this is not about somebody
love is not something that you do,
it is something that you can become.
If you’re willing, you can become love,
you can make your emotion into a very sweet space.
If you make your mind
If you make your body very pleasant, it becomes pleasure.
If you sit here, it can be great pleasure just sitting here and breathing.
If your mind becomes pleasant, we say this is joy.
If your emotions become pleasant, we say this is love.
If your very life energies become pleasant, we say this is blissfulness, this is ecstasy.
If your surroundings become pleasant, we call that success.
Now you’re calling your success with somebody as love, that’s a mistake.
You have a success story with somebody – that is,
you have created pleasantness in the atmosphere between you and let’s say five-ten people around you.
You’re calling that love;
no that is actually success because that needs lots of management.
Juhi Chawla: Yes, it does.
Sadhguru: Yes or no?
Juhi Chawla: Yes it does.
Sadhguru: Yes. But for you to be loving, there is no management.
If you just make your emotions sweet,
your emotions are sweet and it’s beautiful be… be like this.
It’s not about anybody.
If somebody comes, we can share it.
If nobody comes, you can sit here with eyes closed and still be loving,
what’s the problem?
It is not about somebody, it’s not an action.
It is not something that you do,
it is something that you can become (Applause).
Juhi Chawla: It’s a… It’s a lovely, idyllic
Sadhguru: It is not idyllic, it is… it is the way it is.
Juhi Chawla: It is… I mean you’d really have to practice this.
Sadhguru: Why?
Juhi Chawla: Because I’m thinking
Sadhguru: See, this is what exactly I’m saying
if it is an action,
an action comes to perfection with practice, only if it’s an action.
I’m saying love is not an act.
Is health an act?
Are you acting healthy right now?
Juhi Chawla: No.
Sadhguru: I know you’re an actor, but are you acting healthy?
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) No.
Sadhguru: So health is, because
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: …you have done certain things and health is. Isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Oh, we’ve not done certain things
Sadhguru: Oh, we have definite
Juhi Chawla: …we’ve been given
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no. Oh, we’ve been given, but if you eat bad,
if you live bad, you won’t be healthy.
Juhi Chawla: Hmm.
Sadhguru: We’ve done certain things to manage our health.
Similarly, if you do certain things,
you can manage the pleasantness of your mind.
If you do certain other things, you can manage the pleasantness of your emotion.
If you do certain other things, you can manage the pleasantness of your very life energies.
This is things that you can do.
Now, what you can do internally, you’re trying to manage externally.
What can be done here within you,
you are trying to manage by creating an atmosphere around you
which is a very difficult thing to do,
because outside will never happen hundred percent the way you want it.
To some extent we can manage,
we can’t do all of it by ourselves
because there are many forces involved.
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji, you said something about health.
And you said, you do certain things for yourself, certain things,
one - you’re given health and then how you maintain it is you eat well,
you exercise and you remain healthy.
Now, to be loving when maybe in a household,
any situation,
maybe outside, like you said, outside forces are not pleasant
it doesn’t come easily to then just be loving.
So, what is the practice to become that way
or to train yourself to be that way?
Sadhguru: I… I want to remove this idea from your mind.
You believe you need to practice.
Practice means you’re trying to perfet
perfect an action, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: To be loving at all times
Sadhguru: Yes, yes that’s not an act.
Juhi Chawla: No, not an act, but to be so accepting
Sadhguru: No, I don’t want to
I don’t want to go back to the movies, okay? (Juhi Laughs)
Juhi Chawla: No, to be so accepting because
Sadhguru: No, it’s not about accepting.
Right now, do you want to keep your mind
your thought process pleasant or nasty?
Tell me, what is your choice?
Juhi Chawla: Ideally pleasant.
Sadhguru: Just tell me, pleasant or nasty?
You’re thinking about it, this is
Juhi Chawla: No, I am trying to think
should I fox you and say nasty (Laughter).
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Say it.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Okay, nasty.
Sadhguru: I’m going to bless you now (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: No, no, no.
Okay I take back my words (Applause).
Okay. All right, so
Sadhguru: Any human being’s choice for themselves is definitely pleasantness, isn't it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: Body, mind, emotion, everything and surroundings
you want it pleasant.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: So why is it not pleasant?
Surroundings are not pleasant because of many things
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: If your thought and emotion are not pleasant,
it’s entirely you, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: Surroundings – not entirely me, it’s so many forces.
We have to manage them,
we have to juggle them,
not always are we successful with everything around us.
You know different people have different levels of competence to manage the outside.
Not all of us have the same… what to say,
the skill to manage the outside.
But inside, your emotion and your thought,
why is it not happening your way?
This is something we have to look at.
This has to be addressed,
every human being has to address this.
At least your thought and your emotion must happen the way you want it.
on a certain day, a lady went to sleep.
A lady went to sleep;
in her sleep – she had a dream.
I think up there (Gestures) -
oh there are two strata of people, nobody is asleep right (Laughter)?
So that I could pick on you, I’m just looking if I can see.
She went to sleep, up there (Gestures)
and in her dream… She had a dream,
in her dream she saw a hunk of a man standing in that corner.
And then he started coming closer and closer and closer.
He came so close she could even feel his breath.
She trembled, not in fear and then she asked,
“What will you do to me?”
The man said, “Well lady, it’s your dream (Laughter).”
Juhi Chawla: Okay.
Sadhguru: I’m saying what’s happening in your mind is your bloody dream.
Now the problem with life is –
not that life is not happening the way you want it,
even your dream is not happening the way you want it,
that’s the problem (Laughter).
I’m saying at least fix this,
at least let the dream happen the way you want it.
If you were dreaming the way you want right now,
your thought and your emotion would be pleasant, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes, but it… Well
Sadhguru: Fixing the world is another thing, that’s a different game.
That needs lot of skill,
this needs just willingness.
Why we’re continuously talking about joy, blissfulness, love,
is not because it’s a goal by itself,
these are not goals by itself
only by… when you are pleasant by your own nature,
you stop being in pursuit of happiness.
You are fine by yourself,
you don’t have to go anywhere to feel pleasant.
You don’t have to do anything to feel pleasant,
sitting here you’re feeling very pleasant,
now you will look at life the way it is.
Otherwise, you’re an endless race,
pursuit of your happiness is a lifelong thing.
Till your deathbed you’re pursuing,
what does it mean?
If you’re pursuing happiness when you are five, I can understand,
but that was not the fact,
when you’re five you were simply happy by your own nature.
When you’re fifty, you’re pursuing your happiness
this is a failed story, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: But, Sadhguruji, suppose we say this to the common man,
who has a little house
Sadhguru: Where did you meet a common man?
Juhi Chawla:(Laughs). I’m imagining it,
Sadhguru: every man or woman think they’re special, believe me
Juhi Chawla: Oh yes.
Sadhguru: Yes. So where did you meet a common man, I’m asking (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Okay, Sadhguruji when you said about the common person and the special person,
I know some teachers have always told us
and why your own parents always tell you that you know –
you are special,
each one of us is unique
and I remember this part,
I am not sure whether I heard it at your discourse or on a DVD of yours,
where you said… It was about you know people being special
and us always thinking that God knows of us.
And you said something like,
“Do you know all the grasshoppers in your garden?”
So, of course all of us have said, “No”.
So, you said something like,
“So, how does God know each one of you then?”
And I was devastated because I always thought
somebody up there knows me, cares about me and I’m special.
Sadhguru: You thought… you thought you’re number
you thought you were number one on his books, is it?
Juhi Chawla: Well, I’ve been told since I was kid,
“You’re special, you’re unique and God cares about you.”
Sadhguru: Let me tell… Tch, tch, tch… See, if when somebody says you’re unique,
it’s an insult (Juhi Laughs), you know
Juhi Chawla: No, you said – no top line, so you’re
Sadhguru: Okay.
Juhi Chawla: …peaking in different ways.
Sadhguru: in this vast cosmos, this solar system is just a speck.
Tomorrow morning if the whole solar system disappears, vanishes, evaporates,
nobody will even notice it.
Maybe it’s not even in the accounts books of creation,
it’s so small.
In this speck of a solar system,
planet earth is a super speck.
In that, Mumbai is a micro super speck.
In that, you are a big man or a woman (Laughter).
This is a huge problem.
This is a very immense existential problem, you know (Laughs).
This is because we have lost perspective as to who we are, what we are.
Our psychological realities have become bigger than the cosmo… than the cosmic reality.
That is the big problem.
It’s time you step out of your cinema
I’m… I’m not talking about the Hindi cinema,
I’m talking about the cinema that everybody is playing in their own minds.
See, See right now they darkened this whole hall
because it works best that way.
This is the basic technology of a cinema.
If you do not darken the cinema hall,
if you light it up and play a nice cinema, it’s not going to work.
You have to darken it.
So, I’m saying, a cinema of your mind because it’s a dark space.
Every thought is enlarged,
playing out bigger than the cosmic space.
Today, everything in the cosmos is happening perfectly well,
but you have one nasty thought crawling in your head
and it feels like a bad day, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes. Yes.
Sadhguru: So, that’s because your psychological realities,
your petty creation has become larger than the Creator’s creation.
You lost perspective of life.
That is the fundamental basis of all this confusion and suffering.
If you see who you are,
the micro speck that you are,
you wouldn’t imagine that God is made in your own image
and he looks like you and whatever.
Okay, if… if we were all buffalos,
we would definitely think God is a big buffalo (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Okay. Okay, so what is it really?
Please tell us the… Please define it for us,
what is it?
What is going on – this life, this love.
All these emotions that we go through in our lives,
all these thoughts that we create for ourselves,
what is going on?
Sadhguru: See… These are all human possibilities and capabilities.
Every possibility becomes a problem
for those who do not explore the possibility in its right perspective.
Thought is a tremendous possibility.
An ant cannot think like you,
he can work better than you,
he’s more disciplined,
he betters main… better traffic rules than you,
there’s no traffic jam out there (Laughter),
okay but he cannot think like you.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: That sets up apart.
This is a possibility.
But now, this possibility has become a problem for ninety percent of the humanity.
Now they’re freaking because they can think
and they’re thinking all the wrong things.
Their thoughts have become nasty;
if they were pleasant they would have enjoyed their thought process.
Because it’s become nasty, it’s becoming a ailment, isn’t it?
People are suffering their thoughts immensely,
because they do not know how to keep it pleasant,
nothing has been done towards it.
So, what is a possibility always becomes a problem
if you do not explore it in the right perspective.
So your thought and emotion has become a problem,
now love affair is a problem,
you’re making all kinds of things out of it,
which are all coming from this misunderstanding,
not understanding this thought and emotion is generated by me,
I can generate it whichever way I want.
If nastiness is what you like, you do it.
I don’t care if that’s what you like
but you’re suffering it.
If you’re suffering it, you shouldn’t be doing it.
I am not telling you, “Be loving.”
What is your choice –
pleasantness or unpleasantness?
If unpleasantness is your choice, you enjoy it and do it,
what’s my problem?
You want to drink poison, what is my problem?
I am just telling you this is poison, this is this –
drink whatever you want, but by choice.
Don’t drink unconsciously, that’s stupid.
That’s not befitting of a human being,
a human being means we are far more conscious than every other creature on this planet –
that’s what sets us apart.
Every creature eats but we can eat consciously.
So our eating becomes so many things.
Every creature has sexual drives,
they go and fulfill it whichever way.
We can do it consciously.
So, we become something, something.
We’re doing the same things but we’re doing it consciously,
suddenly there is a magic about it,
not because sex is magic, food is magic, no,
because we can do it consciously.
Every basic act like eating and copulating becomes magical
because we can do it consciously.
If you leave that one thing,
if you exclude that one thing from your life
that you are not conscious about the way you think,
the way you feel,
the way you act,
the way you move your body –
if you’re not conscious about it,
everything can turn ugly,
everything can become nasty.
So it is this which sets you apart from every other creature.
So, a dog is walking on the street,
if you show it a biscuit it will wag its tail,
if you do this (Gestures), grrr it will do.
If this is what you are that
if somebody is nice to you,
you will wag your whatever;
if somebody is not nice to you, you will bite them. I’m saying what
where is evolution in you?
Forget about civilization, I’m, talking about evolution.
Where’s the evolution,
where’s the sign of evolution I’m asking? (Applause)
Juhi Chawla: Okay, Sadhguruji let’s go to, hmm
Sadhguru: I’ve seen people copying answers in examination but never questions
Juhi Chawla: Yeah questions (Laughs).
Well,
Today, many women in our modern society are stepping out and having a career
and I just like to know, what do you think of this
of women stepping out, being career people, managing home as well,
being financially independent,
is this good?
Sadhguru: see every woman should do what she wants to do as an individual person.
It should not be made into a trend in a society or the only right thing to do in the world
because I think if… if a woman is
intends to have two children and raise them,
I think it’s a full time job.
I’m not saying she should not go out and work.
If she wishes to, as an individual person, she’s free to do what she wants to do.
But having two children is not about reproduction.
You’re manufacturing the next generation of people.
How the world will be tomorrow,
will be determined by what kind of mothers you have today,
believe me.
you know, I’ve seen many ladies coming to me and say,
when I ask “What’re you doing?
“Oh I’m just a housewife.”
I said, “Why do you say, you’re just a housewife?”
You… you don’t seem to understand the significance of,
you know, being able to nurture two or three new lives.
It’s not… it’s not a ‘not important’ job. It’s a very important job.
career - I want you to understand
Right now because we have made the whole world into economics
unfortunately women also getting as stupid as men.
As if how much money you earn is going to determine the value of your life.
No,
it is just procurement of things that you need,
money is just about that.
Man was procuring,
woman was taking about the more beautiful aspects of life.
Now woman also wants to procure.
If there is such an economic need in the family, fine she must do it.
But it is not a compulsive need,
it must not be set up as something better to do than doing something.
If she sings so… if she… if she plays music or if she just loves her children
or if she cooks beautifully
or she just lives beautifully like a flower,
it’s good enough, I’m saying.
It is not necessary that only if she earns this much money, she’s… her… she’s doing something valuable,
otherwise she’s not.
If there’s an economic need, she can do it.
Or if she has a passion for doing it, she can do it.
But, let not such values be set up in the world because you’re not evolving,
you’re regressing,
you’re making survival more important than aesthetics of life (Applause).
JuhiChawla: Okay Sadhguruji. Let me take you away from this
and let me take you to a world of say films where I come from
Sadhguru: World of films, okay, let’s go. Let’s go movies (Laughter).
JuhiChawla: Years ago when films started
and you know through the sixties, seventies there were lovely stories,
nice values, beautiful music, lyrics;
by the time I was the star in movies some of our Jhatka matka’s might have shocked the previous generations
and they must have said what is all this?
But it was still within limits
Sadhguru: Whose limits (Laughter)?
JuhiChawla:…I mean what’s acceptable to society, whatever have been,
I’ll say… and then now today the complexion of films,
the kind of films we see,
you know it’s little clothed,
it’s live-in relationships
or you know up there on screen for everybody to see and night club culture.
I mean it sometimes worries me
that my children are growing up now
this is what they’re seeing, this is
these are the kind of songs that they’re listening to,
the lyrics are about you know
Sadhguru: From Janam janam to expiry date is the song (Laughter).
JuhiChawla: Yes. So this is the
this is what they’re watching, this is what they think is cool,
this is… this is the hip and happening stuff. I’m little
Sadhguru: I think by the time you came the janam janam was over, isn’t it (Laughter)?
JuhiChawla: No, it was still there, it was in the middle somewhere,
the music was wonderful, the lyrics was still lovely
but today it is munni badhnaam ho gayi and it things
things have really moved to chewing gums
and I’m forgetting at this moment what the lyrics are but then its… its
its… shallow right now.
India has the youngest population in the world right now
so with such a young nation growing up on this, this is the feed
I’m just a little concerned as to what they will turn out to be?
Sadhguru: I’m sure your parents were concerned too.
JuhiChawla: They (Laughter)… Okay. So, can I
Sadhguru: I’m sure my parents were very concerned when I was growing up.
So, every parent has this concern, every generation has this concern
that the next generation is going wrong always.
I understand what you’re saying
this sudden change if every generation likes to go
one step beyond where the previous generation has stepped in, on eve
almost everything just for the sake of doing something different or it’s natural they’ve grown up in one atmosphere
they take it to another level.
JuhiChawla: They move to the next level.
Sadhguru: Yes. Next is not always next (Laughs) that’s what you’re saying.
Next is not always next, right?
JuhiChawla: Yes. It’s not higher
Sadhguru: Okay.
Juhi Chawla: It’s somewhere else, it’s just… it’s
Sadhguru: It’s just next.
So, this concern is always there but
right now the change that is happening is not the next
it is a serious influence because
in the last fifteen years the world’s ability to communicate across cultures and borders
is so heavy and so unprecedented,
nobody has ever been used to these kind of influences before.
Okay, never before this level of influence on our young people
never before possible
no other generation has ever experienced this kind of onslaught from so many directions
and the volume of influence is too big.
So in terms of changes are happening not,
it is not next
it is simply somewhere and nobody knows where it is
because it’s too complex and too mixed.
Nobody knows where it is including the young people.
It’s just a mix of things.
So this is because of a sudden onslaught of information and communication.
It’s not for us to judge whether it’s good or bad;
it is just that definitely this level of information –
when I say information,
it’s like when we were growing up
I believe it was true for your generation also
we… we never knew what is boredom, okay?
This was… there was no such thing,
we were just excited about everything that came our way.
But you see today twelve-year-old kids,
if you tell them what – Ahhm(Gestures).
Juhi Chawla: Yes (Laughs).
Sadhguru: You see they’re just bored because
they know the whole cosmos there it’s
they have seen it on their phone screen not even on a computer screen.
On the phone screen they’ve seen the entire cosmos.
They know everything,
things that you do not know they know,
you ask them they know it.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: By information
by the time they’re eighteen they have had five love affairs and gone (Laughter).
in the western world it’s like that here also it’s beginning to happen, okay.
So by the time they’re eighteen they’ve seen everything that you need to see
with body, mind, emotion, okay.
By the time they’re twenty-five what,
what next?
Juhi Chawla: What next, yes.
Sadhguru: No, you will see… this is not my wish
but this is something that I see the way people’s minds are working,
the way they’re being led in with information –
I’m not a… by any standards a pessimistic person
but I’m just seeing this
if this level of information continues and it will multiply many fold
for the coming generations,
you should not be surprised
in the next fifty to hundred years
if fifty percent of the human population choose to commit suicide
you should not be surprised
because that is what will happen to the mind (Few audience clap).
Somebody is clapping, look at this it’s popular (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: No you have just touched a chord and that’s
Sadhguru: No, I’m saying
Juhi Chawla:…we think we realize something.
Sadhguru: Today, today
this day more people commit suicide in this world
than all the wars and murders and accidents manage to kill.
So more people are on self-help already than
murderers, war mongers, bad drivers, everything put together,
more people are on self-help.
And if this level of information onslaught continues on human mind –
I know the nature of mind absolutely because I know my mind,
I know how it works, what it can handle, what it cannot do,
I know it clearly what human mind is.
That’s the reason why I don’t have to read people’s books
or listen to their entire thing
if they say one sentence I know what their mind is
because I know the structure of human mind entirely.
Otherwise I wouldn’t be who I am.
So I’m saying this,
if this level of information onslaught continues at the same phase or at higher phase,
which is possible in the next few years,
this will definitely lead to wanting to terminate yourself
because there would be nothing to live for.
There is no joy and excitement about anything.
You please watch your children
by the time they’re twelve, fifteen they’re just bored.
You look back at your own life those of you who are over fifty years of age
just look back at in… or… on your own life.
When you were twelve, fifteen
was there any room for you to get bored about anything?
Simply you are excited about every little thing, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Today you will see it’s almost a common feature
twelve, fifteen year old kids are just bored only thing is (Gestures like operating phone).
Juhi Chawla: Yes, they are all on iPad’s and iPhones. Yes, they are on gadgets.
Sadhguru: Because we’re talking about Love and Life -
all this will not mean nothing because you had one love affair when you were eighteen years of age.
You thought this is your life and you’re going to… willing to die for it;
whether you died for it or not but at least at that time you thought you’ll die for it, okay?
Today by the… on Facebook they had twenty-two love affairs going simultaneously (Laughter).
It just means nothing.
I… I’m not saying they should have it or not have it;
all I’m saying is this will lead to a certain overload on the mind
and suddenly a human being will think why am I here?
You know that big Shakespearian question
“To be or not to be.”
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: This is not the most intelligent question -
unfortunately people think so
this is only because you have not been touched by life.
You are not a piece of life,
you’re just a psychological case,
you are full of thoughts and emotions.
You have not touched life at all.
You think your thoughts and la… emotions are life?
No!
Your thoughts and emotions are the drama that you are creating in your mind,
it is your cinema.
You must be able to end it somewhere.
If you do not know how to put ‘the end’ then it’s going on endless cinema you’re going crazy.
Life is happening here,
you know your work is not life,
your family is not life, your career is not life,
your cinema is not life, your thought is not life,
your emotion is not life.
Life is happening here,
everything else is accessories to life.
Now the frills of life have become larger than life itself.
Life is entirely missed;
if you touch life within you, then it’s an explosion of energy.
When such a thing never happens to you,
because you have information about the whole cosmos on your phone screen,
you’ll never be touched by life because too much information, too much thought,
even emotion is drying up, too much thought.
This has happened.
If you look at European philosophy in the last hundred, hundred and fifty years
you will see if you read Dostoyevsky you will want to commit suicide.
Brilliant, intellectually brilliant
but you will wonder why are you alive
because intellect is like that. If you wake up in the morning
devoid of any… touching any life’s experience within you
don’t think about your child’s face,
do not think about the flowers in the garden,
birds in the sky,
nothing beautiful that ever touched you
just think logically you have to get out of bed that’s not a small feat,
you have to brush your teeth, breakfast, go to work, eat, work, eat, sleep
again tomorrow morning same thing,
next fifty years you have to do the same process every day.
If you look at it one hundred percent logically and intellectually
you will have no reason to live today morning
tomorrow morning.
It’s only if you’re touched by something suddenly it’s worth living.
If you’re not touched by anything then it’s not worth living.
What is... what is so worth living about a human being –
waking up in the morning,
totking… tro… tr… you know troding (treading?) through life,
trudging through life everyday eating, sleeping, same rubbish.
What is the point?
There is no point, unless you’re touched by something,
some magic of life if it doesn’t touch you either in the form of love
or in the form of a flower or in the form of something within you.
If something doesn’t sparkle within you definitely there is a question
whether I should live or not, isn’t it?
And we are taking humanity in that direction with this overload of information.
Information is not knowing,
information is just garbage collection.
You just gather things which don’t mean anything to you.
You look smart in a tea party but you’re not smart with life,
okay.
If you’re smart with life you must be blissful, isn’t it (Laughs)?
If you’re really smart with life you must be joyful and blissful. Isn’t it so?
You’re only smart in a tea party
because you know when somebody is talking something,
“You know the galaxy Z22,
what happens there?”
Everybody – WOW! (Laughter)
They can also open the internet and the same thing.
You see… you think this guy visited the galaxy (Laughter)?
Juhi Chawla: So Sadhguruji then what is it,
okay so for all of us,
give us in clear simple, simple sentences –
do this and you will be at least on the way to be blissful or happy or aware or
living in a nice conscious way (Laughs).
Sadhguru: See if you… if you just observe,
if everybody makes a little effort,
everybody take a little time for this piece of life, okay.
Not for your family,
not for your career,
not for something else, something else,
just for this piece of life give it little time
because this is the most important piece of life in your life, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Even if you’re in love with somebody (Laughs),
still this is the most important piece of life, isn’t it?
So pay some attention to this,
how does it happen, why have you taken it for granted?
Believe me you’re not going to be here for an…ever.
I’ll bless you with a long life but you’re going to fall dead one day (Laughter).
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So do not take this for granted.
If you wake up in the morning
tomorrow if you wake up in the morning (Laughter)
no this is not my wish but I want you to know
of all that people who go to bed tonight,
over a million people will not wake up tomorrow morning
and tomorrow if you and me wake up tomorrow morning,
is it not a fantastic thing?
A million people did not wake up.
You woke up,
is it not a great thing?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Just look at the ceiling and smile,
you are still awake (Laughter &amp; Applause),
you’re still there.
A million people did not get up in the morning
and you woke up
and for many, many millions of people
somebody, who is dear to them did not wake up.
So just check those five, six people around you
they all woke up – WOW! It’s a fantastic day (Laughter).
You woke up and everybody who matters to you around you woke up,
is it not fantastic day?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t think so?
Participants: Yes (Laughter)
Juhi Chawla: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t seem to think so
because the problem is just this you are living with an idea that you are immortal.
When I say you’re immortal,
you’re not actually thinking you’re immortal
but you’re not conscious of your mortality.
If you’re not conscious of your mortality,
somewhere you think you’re immortal, isn’t it?
How many moments in a day are you conscious that you’re mortal?
If you were conscious would you have time to crib,
would you have time to fight with somebody,
would you have time to do some rubbish with your life?
If you knew
if you’re conscious that you are mortal you would do nothing
other than what is absolutely needed for you and everybody around you.
This one thing if you do
if you just remind yourself you
don’t think this is a negative thing,
death is not a negative thing; it’s the only thing which has added value to your life.
If you’re here forever you would be unbearable (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Yeah (Laughs), yes, yes.
Sadhguru: Isn’t it?
Aren’t we glad everybody dies one day (Laughs)?
If you just become conscious of this one thing
that always you’re conscious that “I’m mortal,”
you don’t have to think “I will die today.”
We don’t intend, we want to live as far as possible,
just you know “One day I will die.”
If you’re just conscious of this one thing
you will naturally become spiritual.
You will not become spiritual by thinking about God.
You will become unrealistic, hallucinatory, you will start talking to somebody,
you will start doing all kinds of things.
Already people, you know they have ear phones ON and they’re talking
you don’t know whether they’ve lost it or they… (Laughter)
Ten years ago if somebody was walking on the street talking you would know that he’s lost
but today you don’t know (Laughter).
Whether they got their head phones on
or they just lost it and they’re talking, we cannot make out.
But if you are conscious that you’re mortal every moment of your life,
spiritual process has begun for you.
So the one… one of the main reasons,
one of the fundamental reasons why that all these things have to be taught to you that she is repeatedly asking this question
‘were you born special, did you have normal birth or not’ is simply because
most people have forgotten they are mortal.
They think they’re immortal, they may not actually think they’re immortal
but they’re not conscious they are mortal.
With every step with every breath if they were conscious of this,
you know how consciously they would live?
They would become fantastic. It is your mortality which makes you, want to know what is the nature of your existence.
You really want to know where you came from, where you will go only when it sinks into you
all this drama pup - one day it will end
but right now you think only others appear in obituary columns,
you are only going to read it (Laughter &amp; Applause).
Juhi Chawla: That was… that was simply beautiful.
Sadhguru: That’s all that’s needed
if you want to know the value of life
just know that it’s a brief happening.
the time that you spend here as life it’s a very relative experience.
If you’re truly joyful and ecstatic, it’s horribly brief, believe me.
I feel like I was born day before yesterday,
see already how I have become (Showing his beard) (Laughter), okay?
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: But on a particular day if you’re depressed or miserable,
one day seems like an endless thing.
So, only miserable people have a looooooooong life (Laughter).
If you’re a joyful, ecstatic person life is always brief,
if you live to be hundred it’s still very brief.
For what possibilities a human being carries, for the immensity of what a human being is –
it’s too brief a life.
If you’re given hundred years, two hundred years it’s still, still too brief
because before you know what’s happening before you exp… exp… explore a few dimensions of life it’ll be over.
It’ll be over, over, okay.
Only miserable people have a very long life.
They feel it’s very long (Laughs).
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji here we have a few questions
The first stion is from Prabhas Sundaras… Sundar Sen -
where and how do we draw the line between loving unconditionally
and becoming a doormat (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: See we need to understand this -
what’s being right now passed around as love is generally a mutual benefit scheme
you give me this, I’ll give you that;
if you don’t give me that I don’t give you this
this is not said but it’s done (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Okay (Laughs).
Sadhguru: It’s done, isn’t it?
It’s not said.
So, human beings have physical, psychological, emotional, economic, social
and various other kinds of needs.
To fulfill these things
when you say “I love you”,
instead of making these things ugly needs that we have to
ugly transactions that we have to do – you give me this, you give me that
to bring some aesthetic and beauty to this transaction,
we quote it with a certain amount of sweetness of emotion
which we call as love affair
where the transactions happen more smoothly
because once we are human somehow doing basic transactions in a basic way makes us feel ugly.
If you take food with both your hands and eat it, it’s ugly, isn’t it?
We want to eat in a certain way.
Similarly to fulfill our physical needs,
emotional needs, economic needs we have arrangements,
where we can conduct this in a more aesthetic manner.
I’m not saying it’s right or wrong, this is the fact of life.
So, this level of love,
I call this
this is enough for… to fulfill the domestic needs of one’s
you know for two people to live together,
to fulfill their needs,
to produce children,
to raise them, domestic level of love affair people can have.
But if people want to have a love affair which will bring them to an ultimate union,
then not many people are competent to do that.
Not people… not many people are ready to have that kind of a love affair
where it’ll make two lives into one.
Two becomes actually one in experience
that will need something more.
Most people are competent of using love to fulfill the domestic needs
but to go beyond that they are not ready.
When I say they’re not ready, either
I’m not talking about this person or that person.
So when one is ready and another is not ready or
one is making an effort and another doesn’t have the effort,
then it feels like somebody is becoming a doormat.
That is what it is that it feels like they’re being exploited
but above all, one who is longing to become… use love as a way of ultimate union
should not be bothered about being doormat, this and that.
In India we have a culture
where by choice people name themselves as slaves.
You know Ramdas, Krishnadas, this das, that das
what is this?
They’re openly saying “I’m a slave,
I’m a doormat,
I want to be a doormat.”
They are not saying, “I’m afraid I’ll be used as a doormat.”
They’re saying, “I want to be doormat”(Laughs).
So, this is a kind of love that they’re wanting to use to
use for ultimate union,
this is not for domestic purposes.
So, if you’re looking for ultimate union then love is a different affair.
If you’re looking for conducting of domestic affairs
then you must manage dignity,
who gets what?
If anybody is using more than what they should then
if you don’t give me that I don’t give you this, okay?
Otherwise if you’re looking for ultimate union
you should not think of all these things, that’s a different affair.
That’s not for normal social thing.
if you fall in love itself you become vulnerable to somebody.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: Without becoming vulnerable there is no love affair,
you have to fall.
When you fall, somebody may raise you
or somebody may walk over you (Laughs).
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: But the thing is the
the experience of your life is beautiful
because you fell not because they raised you,
not because they walked over you,
because you could actually have the sense of abandon in you to fall,
that was the beauty of your love affair
not what they gave you, what they did to you, this – no!
The beauty was you sat alone and you think you really loved this person
so much you’re willing to die,
that was the most beautiful moment (Applause).
Not the moment they gave you a big gift,
not the moment they gave you a diamond ring,
not the moment they said this and that about you – no!
You just sat here and you’re willing to die, that was the moment;
not just a doormat,
you’re willing to be the dust on their feet, okay?
I’m not saying you should be like that –
I’m saying where love transformed itself into a devotion.
If you fall in love itself you become very vulnerable
but there are still some shreds of sanity in love affairs that you can recover.
But if you become a devotee there is no sanity left and you cannot recover.
So, before you tread such a land
you must see whether you’re for it or not.
What are your goals first of all?
If your goal is to make a life a cautioned,
a very measured love affair is good
but you’re… your… your thing is you want to dissolve into the process of life
you don’t want to have a good life,
you’re not planning to have a good life
you just want to become explosion of life,
you don’t care what you get and what you don’t get,
then you become a devotee.
a devotion means it’s your intention to dissolve into your object of devotion.
So a devotee is not expecting whether I’ll become a doormat or a crown on somebody’s head.
Whatever I become as long as I can touch your feet or head or whatever,
it’s fine with me.
Juhi Chawla: Yeah.
Sadhguru: So that’s a different state of existence.
I don’t think
somebody who is looking for domestic level of love affair should even ask that question (Laughs &amp; Applause).
JuhiChawla: Mmm, We have one question from the social media the Facebook (Laughter).
AmitMadan wants to know
in this materialistic age the real feeling of love is disappearing from our life,
most of the love we receive from others and express to others is superficial.
How can we reinforce the real feeling of love in our own life and in others?
Sadhguru: Forget about others.
If you
if you learn to be loving by your own nature
not because of somebody else or something else
I know the question is coming from Facebook,
there’s an enormous possibility (Laughter),
you can even love those people who don’t even exist (Laughter),
so, I’m saying it’s a tremendous possibility
so (Laughs)
if you just become love,
not love somebody then you will know the nature of love.
If you love somebody it’s a fickle happening
because no human being will happen hundred percent the way you want them.
Every human being on this planet is going to disappoint you, believe me,
not because they’ll do something wrong because nobody can fulfill the
unrealistic expectation you have of them.
It’s simply not possible.
Have you been able to fulfill anybody’s expectation I’m asking you entirely?
Partially but never entirely, isn’t it?
So nobody else will be able to do it
unless you’re a still such a hopeless romantic
you’re still waiting that ideal person is going to come from somewhere –
no!
Believe me whoever comes,
I want you to know the ideal people whom you worship,
when Krishna was there his wives complained (Laughter), all right?
JuhiChawla: So there is no hope for us,
yes?
Please remember this (Laughter), okay.
Sadhguruji this is where we open yes the platform,
its… anybody has a question this is the moment.
Questioner: My name is Ananth.
My question is about marriage,
divorce.
Sadhguru: No, no, they are two different things (Laughter &amp; Applause).
Questioner: what I see today is many youngsters like many of them they don’t want to marry
and few of them who marry
there are occasions where they are getting divorced;
so would you like to throw some light on this situation Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: See, you need to understand the institution of marriage.
One thing is as we said a little while ago
it’s about bringing a certain sanctity to the simple basic needs that every human being has.
I will repeat there are physical needs,
there are psychological needs,
there are economic needs,
emotional needs,
social needs,
variety of needs.
To fulfill all these things we set up an institution called marriage
where all these can be conducted in a sensible manner,
otherwise if we did it on the streets like every other creature
it would turn ugly for us.
And we will feel not good about it.
So, to bring some sense of organization,
some aesthetic,
some stability,
because man and woman coming together naturally brought fresh life.
The nature of human life,
the nature of human offspring is such
that because of the possibilities that a human being carries,
it is... compared to any other creature, it is the most helpless life
which needs maximum amount of support.
You could leave a puppy on the street;
as long as he gets food, he grows up into a good dog,
no problem.
But not so with a human being;
he doesn’t need just physical support,
he needs variety of support and stab… above all the stable situation.
Whether there should be marriage in society or not
one will debate when they are eighteen because
physical body is asking for freedom, all right.
At that time everybody questions –
is marriage really needed,
why can’t we just live whichever way we want?
But when you are three years of age you valued marriage immensely,
a stable marriage immensely.
Isn’t it so?
Yes or no?
JuhiChawla: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: Not yours,
your parents.
JuhiChawla: The parents, yes (Laughter).
Sadhguru: When you were three, four of yours
three, four years of age you’re one hundred percent for marriage
again when you become forty-five, fifty again you’re hundred percent for marriage
between and eighteen and thirty-five you’re questioning the whole process (Laughter &amp; Applause),
okay?
JuhiChawla: That’s true (Laughs).
Sadhguru: I’m not saying marriage is the thing but do you have a better alternative?
If you have a better alternative,
damn the marriage
but you have not come up with a better alternative
because a stable situation is a must for a child.
Once you have a child it’s a twenty year project (Laughter), okay?
That is if they do well,
if they don’t do well it’s a lifelong project (Laughter &amp; Applause).
So if you want to get into such projects
at least twenty years there must be a commitment to create a stable situation.
Your whims and fancies will change,
your emotions will change;
if that is what it is, don’t get into such situations.
It’s not compulsory for everybody to get married,
it’s good young pe… you were saying people are thinking whether to get married.
I’m glad it is not necessary for everybody
but if you get into it and if you… especially if you get into children
you must understand, it’s a minimum twenty year project
whether you like it or you don’t like it.
Otherwise you shouldn’t get into those projects,
you don’t walk into a project,
drop it half way and walk away, isn’t it?
They have their benefits and they have their problems.
It’s your choice but at least choose consciously.
You don’t have to get married because everybody is getting married,
you don’t have to talk about marriage and divorce in same breath
as if they come together (Laughter).
This is a completely an American idea,
you’re thinking of marriage and divorce together
nobody thought of divorce in this country till recently, isn’t it?
Why should you ever talk about marriage and divorce in one breath?
It’s… it’s a crime.
It’s really a crime to think on those lines.
But if it so happens
something truly went wrong between two people
and they have to separate that will any way inevitably happen.
You don’t have to plan it at the time of wedding (Laughter).
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
NamaskaramJuhi Mam.
you mentioned about survival
and you talked about aesthetics of life.
I would like
I would request you to elaborate on aesthetics of life
and my second question is for my friend -
I don’t know whether you will answer it or not
but I just want to mention it over here
because she has requested me to do so.
Her question is
what is the purpose of this universe?
Sadhguru: Oh! Tell your friend I didn’t make it (Laughter).
Questioner: Thank you so much.
Sadhguru: Why am I being blamed for these things (Laughter)? I
the only thing I have done is I’ve figured the nature of my life
and by figuring the nature of this life
I know by inference
every life has happened the same way,
not just every life,
the very cosmos has happened the same way.
If you know the nature of this life from its origin to its ultimate
you know the nature of everything by inference,
everything that’s worth knowing.
So, tell your friend I didn’t make this Universe
so don’t blame me for such big things.
I just figured my way through my life
and we should figure it
if you figure it you will see the most important thing that’s happening in your life right now is
that you’re alive,
nothing else.
Not that stocks have gone up today that’s not the most important thing,
not your love affair,
not this and that –
if you don’t understand what I’m saying
suppose tomorrow you lost… I’m not saying you must wish
I’m not wishing you must loose
but suppose tomorrow you lost half your money and you’re feeling depressed
and your mind says I want to die.
Close your mouth, hold your nose like this (With hands blocking nose) for two minutes,
your body says to hell with your money, I want to live (Laughter/Applause).
Tomorrow you found your… love affair collapsed
and your mind says I want to die,
check (Sadhguru blocks his nose and closes mouth) (Laughter).
The life within you says to hell with your love affair, I want to live.
every time you feel little suicidal or depressed
just check (Again blocks mouth and nose),
the life within you says to hell with all these things, I want to live.
So, I want to know the most important thing that’s happening to you right now is life itself,
not the fancy thoughts that you have,
not the emotions that you have,
not financial arrangements
or family arrangements
or whatever rubbish you have built around you
these are all accessories to life,
these are all frills.
Frills are so much you’re missing the skirt,
that’s the whole problem with you (Laughter).
Yes,
so much frill
fundamental things are forgotten (Laughter).
So this is the most important thing.
right now for most people life means their job,
life means the new house they’re building,
life means the car that they bought,
life means their wife, their husband, their children –
No!
Life means what’s throbbing here (Pointing to himself),
not even your body,
not your mind,
not your thought,
not your emotion.
What is right now throbbing here (Pointing to himself) this is life.
Because this is ON everything else seems to be meaningful.
If this one stops nothing around you means any damn thing to you or to anybody.
(Sadhguru): when I traveled abroad I was in the,
you know, certain conferences,
people came up to me and said,
‘Oh you are that amazing tree planter.
I said, ‘I am not a tree planter.’
They said, ‘Why you planted millions of trees, didn't you?’
I said, ‘But I am not a tree planter.’
So they asked me, ‘What do you do?’
So I said, ‘I make people flower.’
If people flower within themselves,
they clearly understand there is nothing here which is not connected to them.
There is nothing in this planet or anywhere in the universe
which is not connected to you.
If you feel this connection,
if this is not an idea in your mind,
if this is a living reality for you that you experience everything as a part of yourself,
taking care of everything is just like taking care of your body
to whatever extent you can do,
you do.
So spiritual process
and
taking care of the world,
taking care of the people,
taking care of the animal or the plant,
are not different because
anybody who claims to be spiritual and be… and becomes oblivious
to what’s around him,
there is nothing spiritual about him
unless he is also oblivious to himself.
Only that being who is oblivious to his own pain,
who is oblivious to even his own existence,
he can afford to be oblivious to everybody and everything.
As long as you are conscious of your pain and your way of being,
you have to be conscious of the way of everything that’s happening around you;
there is no other way to be.
you are saying
achieving your full potential is not happiness
How did this happen?
See
Tell me
What is the greatest pleasure in your life
Moments of accomplishment, success, yes or no?
Is it so or no?
It could be in personal life, it could be in professional life
It could be in social life
But
When you get to do something well
That is when you are happy
Isn't it?
It could be small thing, it could be big thing
It may be a great activity, or it may be you just hit the ball straight
you know, the amount of joy lot of people are not coming home from the golf course
because they hit it straight one day
So , the question is not about this or that
In human life, the purpose of activity is success
Any activity,
It you perform some activity you have to do it successfully, isn't it?
Don't think your childrens dont have it
They also have it
Only thing is because you are nagging them continuously
they want to do something just reverse
because reverse, they understand as revolution
Don't push them into that revolution
If they have to evolve, you have to show evolution
You have to exhibit evolution
Because your children don't listen to the nonsense that you speak
They are observing how you live
I want you to put yourself today through serious audit
and make yourself tomorrow morning
the way your children would love you
Your child doesn't need a boss
Your child needs a friend
Tell me , when you were growing up
If you have some issues and some problems within your house
Did you first go to your parents, or to your friends
Friends!
Unfortunate, isn't it?
Unqualified advice will happen among the friends
If you were their friend, real friend, not the boss
that everybody is trying to be
If you were a genuine friend
to your child
he or she would come to you first
That would be great
Isn't it?
Please make that happen
Vinita Bali: So, I want to explore two or three other dimensions that you spoke about.
You spoke about capacity,
you spoke about leadership.
So, talk to us a little bit about what you see as,
what are
Who are leaders and what is leadership?
Is there a difference, is it…?
Sadhguru: I know there’s a lot of talk about leadership and wanting to become leaders.
I don’t think anybody should try to become a leader,
it’s quite obscene that “I want to become a leader”
that means all of you should be what?
I don’t know. I know what you would like to call yourself (Laughs).
It’s not about you wanting to become a leader or someone want to be
wanting to become a leader.
Because of a certain thing that you have done within yourself
or a certain level of observation
or a certain intelligence
or a certain experience,
you are able to see something that most people are not able to see.
The moment you are able to see something,
then people will naturally look up to you as a leader
because you are seeing something that they cannot see.
And if you become a leader, there are many ways to become a leader
you can get elected,
you can get selected,
you can work it,
you can pull other people down and become a leader
or simply people will rise you as a leader
because they see that either you are able to see something or you are able to do something,
which they themselves cannot do.
I feel this is the way leadership should happen –
if you want to call it that –
that someone is able to see something and do something that others cannot do,
so everybody wishes he must take charge of the situation
because naturally, he will be able to do something that the others will not be able to do.
So, what is the quality of leadership?
Leadership means, once you sit on a perch,
you better see clearer than others,
otherwise you will make a ridiculous fool of yourself (Laughs).
There’s a whole… You know, in the nation,
certain things have been happening.
Somebody sits on a perch and he doesn’t see any better than you,
he looks like a fool immediately.
So, it is not about you wanting to sit on the perch,
you wanting to see something must get you to the perch,
not because you want to be above everybody else you get to the perch.
So, what is the quality of a leader?
I don’t think there’s any particular quality.
One thing is –
a leader means his sense of life is beyond himself.
It’s not about
His sense of identity is beyond himself.
Somebody becomes a leader because he is willing to think and feel and act
for more people than himself.
If you act for yourself, you are called self-centered.
If you just act for the sake of two or three people you gather in the form of family,
you are named as Dhritarashtra.
There are modern names for that.
If you identify yourself with the entire nation or the world,
you will be looked at in a different way.
Essentially, your leadership will come from the right context,
depending upon what you are identified with
because everybody needs an identity.
What sort of identity have you taken,
will determine the context and the quality of your leadership.
Vinita Bali: In that context, isn’t leadership something that,
you know, each of us can individually manifest?
If I were to describe
one dimension of leadership as saying it is about taking ownership to create a better outcome?
In that context, you know we can convert leadership from a noun to a verb?
Sadhguru: I don’t know that much grammar, okay (Laughter)?
Vinita Bali: But you can try.
Sadhguru: See whatever we do,
every human activity,
the purpose of an activity is to produce something.
Production may be a safety pin, a computer, love, joy, health, well-being,
it doesn’t matter what,
we want to produce something. When we act, we want it to be effective.
How small an act or how big an act is not the important (thing?).
We want something to happen effectively, which means it’s a question of efficiency,
it’s a question of with how little, how much more you could do.
That’s what makes you
because all of us have the same amount of time in a day.
People always tell me, “Sadhguru, you had such a long day.”
I said, “Unfortunately, there’s no long day, god… you know,
they give me only twenty-four hours.”
I would like to bargain for more but it’s not happening (Laughs).
You can… You can make it more by
increasing your efficiency, the way you function,
including people as a part of yourself where other people will function as a part of you
so that you don’t have to bother about so many things around you.
In this sense, you can enhance what you do but time-wise,
all of us have the same time, we can’t help it.
So, how much can you produce in how little time,
in how mu… how little material, is the question.
In the limited span of time, which we have as life,
what is it that we can do?
Is it just about efficiency?
Is it about simply mindless efficiency
“Do better, do better”? No.
At different times in history, people seem to want different things on the surface.
But essentially, no matter which time of history,
who they are,
which part of the world they are,
everybody wants the same thing – well-being.
But their idea of well-being
Everybody has their idea how to get there, but everybody wants well-being,
no question about that. It doesn’t matter which part of the world you go,
whether you came here thousand years ago or today or hundred years later,
you will see people will be still seeking well-being.
In pursuit of well-being,
maybe hundred years ago, somebody would be going in search of water.
Today, you are going in search of the Wi-Fi cloud (Vinita Bali laughs)
but still well-being.
People’s idea of well-being, whatever that is,
but people are only well only when something beautiful happens within themselves.
They think they’re going to cause it to themselves
by some means but people have been happy before the Wi-Fi came,
people have been happy before the automobile came,
people have been happy before all the luxuries we are enjoying today,
appeared.
So, what I’m saying is well-being
If you are in pursuit of well-being,
essentially it is about what happens within the human being.
What happens within the human being in the name of so many things –
I don’t want to name all the things
in the name of so many things, what we call as family, society and another world,
which we call as corporate world (Laughs),
all these things we created,
these are all different names or different mechanisms
that we believe will bring well-being to us.
Somebody built a family,
somebody built a corporation – both in pursuit of well-being, isn’t it?
I must tell you this, the first time I was at Davos, many years ago,
they were almost resentful,
“Why… What is a mystic doing in economic summit” (Laughs)?
I
And a particular CEO who was running
was in charge of a top computer manufacturing company
three months later, they got sold out to the Chinese (Laughter)
Vinita Bali: (Laughs) We can guess who they were (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: So he was very resentful, “What are you doing here?”
Then I told him, “See, what’s your business?”
He said, “I do computers.”
I said, “See, whether you manufacture a computer or a safety pin or in between anything,
fundamentally, this is about human well-being.
The basic business is human well-being.
You may do it through your computer,
somebody will produce safety pin,
somebody will produce a cloth,
somebody will produce something else.
It doesn’t matter what you’re doing, the fundamental business is human well-being
and that’s my business too,
that’s why I’m here” (Laughter).
[Namaskar] Sadhguru, my name is ritu
My question is were calling to you is being successful in
spirituality in spirituality or life in spirituality and
Will I know it before I die?
See what?
this entire
Contrived ideas about what is spirituality? What's happened is
people think if they are seeking God they're spiritual
what you need to understand is you have already made an assumption and
Then then you are trying to concretize your assumption
You want a guru to tell you yes God is there seeking?
Seeking means this you don't know
Whether God rules this existence or devil rules this existence or it's simply unrolled like India
You don't know that's why you want to seek you seeking means you do not know [and] you want to know
If one has to be successful as I said earlier the most important thing is
You your intelligence is not
identified with anything because the nature of the intellect is this the moment you take on an identity your
Intellect will work hard to protect that identity
You just have to tell yourself three times
I'm an Indian suddenly everything Indian looks nice everything across the border doesn't look nice. You just have to tell yourself
I am this and immediately it only protects that and nothing else
this is the nature of the intellect in fact that is the work of the intellect because
Intellect is a tool of survival
Intellect is not ultimate intelligence
unfortunately because we are too much under European influence and
Somebody there said I think so, I exist. We just lost it in India in the yogic system
We do not ascribe too much significance to your thought first of all
So once we why we
do not give
significance to thought process is
it can only happen from the limited data that you have Gathered what we call is thought whatever kind of thought you have is just
Recycling the limited Data that you have gathered you may think about Gods you may think about pleasure
You may think politics you may think money. It is only the data that you have [you're] recycling
You are not you are not see you may be thinking whatever
So I have been telling this is a hard thing to do with people
constantly telling them
If God appears in your meditation, you just have to ignore him
ha but Sadhguru if Shiva comes especially if he comes
because
[Shiva] [is] coming only because of the calendar images that you have seen
If you are born elsewhere
Somebody else would be coming
So this is the old data
Playing up so whatever place up. See you cannot
You cannot think God you cannot think money
You cannot think ocean or the sky you are only recycling the limited Data so we don't acknowledge
Thought process as a great form of intelligence. It's a wonderful instrument for handling your
survival in the Material World
But if you want to pursue something there are other dimensions of intelligence within you to put it very very simply
today afternoon, whatever you had for lunch let us say you had a chapati a
Chapati turns into a wonderful woman like you
Because you eat the chapati if so he'll eat this chapati it will turn into a man
if a dog eats [a]
That is why I'm saying
you're not getting it what I am saying is if
A dog eats the chapati it turns into your dog so very intelligent Chapati you think
No, this is programmed in your system. There is a certain volume of memory and intelligence
which is capable of turning a simple chapati into a human being when I say human being I am
talking about the most complex mechanism in the universe that we know [of]
There may be others
But this is the most complex mechanism in the universe that we know of what have you
manufactured such a complex machine with with Chapatis bananas dall and this and that just
[about] anything you eat gets transformed, so there is an intelligence within you which is the very source of creation
instead [of] finding access to this you [are] too lost in your own thought process once you get lost in your thought process your
identities become Super strong
When they become super strong you have a sense of confidence, but all your clarity will go away [unfortunately]
[the] very foundations of the so-called religions of the world is about building confidence. Don't worry
God is with you. You know there's some [bank]. There are some bank advertisements. You [know], I'm with you
You know our banker is with you
so this is a
confidence-building measure
Process, but confidence without clarity is a disastrous process
What you need is clarity confidence means you can't see but you're confident
This is [a] dangerous way to go. This is what this is a continuous disaster
see it doesn't take thousands of years to figure out simple aspects of life. [I'm] saying now
[suhail] is going at these things anger hatred all kinds of prejudice against each other with great
Vehemence about it what I am saying is these are simple things in a human being after
Million years of living here if you still can't figure it out which way to be out of it obviously
[your] intellect is not doing well enough isn't it you need other dimensions of intelligence people ask me
Sadhguru all other gurus are doing so many miracles. You don't do anything ?
Said you want me to pull a pigeon out of my pocket
If I do that you will have a bird and I'll have a shitty pocket
But no, it's Jimmy's but you do acknowledge
That there are many such people who are actually
defrauding the
emotions of a large population by doing this kind of Nonsense
see Corruption is not the pre [agata] V' of only spiritual people
There are corrupt politicians there are corrupt lawyers there are corrupt
Policemen there are corrupt doctors there [are] corrupt every kind of profession. [okay]? It has entered every sphere of life
it is just that when [a]
Person who claims to be a spiritual guide or a guru turns corrupt it stands out glaring
Because today if you go to a police station you're expecting him to be corrupt
unfortunately
If he's not corrupt you surprised
That's when you talk about it. Oh my God. I went to the police station [that] didn't the guy didn't ask for a buck
He did the job [for] me. You know
But when you go to your doctor if he is corrupt your little hurt because you placed your physical self in his hands
but when you go to your guru
You placed your entire life in his hands if he [is] corrupt you very profoundly hurt all right?
So the integrity that is necessary to perform different levels of activities
Definitely more demanding when more trust is
invested in that but unfortunately
Spiritual Enterprise has started
[ok] it's an enterprise if you read two pages of Gita
You can become a guru in the country you don't have to read in the entire thing
Two pages and go on repeating the same two pages in a language that other people don't understand you will become a guru
So about being successful. We have spiritual process. This is all you have to do tonight when you go home sit on your bed
Look at yourself. What is you what you gathered?
Okay, you have a home you gathered it you have people you gathered them
You have clothes you gather this
You have a body you gather this the content of your mind you gathered it
See before going to bed close your eyes and see if you can keep all that aside even
Intellectually just try to keep it aside and go to bed every day
You will see one day you will wake up in a way you have not believed possible
truly awake
Questioner: I was wondering how can I decrease my hours of sleep
and how can I improve my sleep quality?
Sadhguru: See, sleep is not a requirement in one’s life.
What the body requires is rest.
Sleep is just one form of rest.
Lot of people are beginning to think
in Tamil Nadu if somebody says, ‘He is resting,’ means
they’re sleeping. (Laughter)
Need not be.
You can sit and rest, isn’t it?
Yes?
You can stand and also rest.
You’re running –
if you stand, doesn’t it feel like rest?
You’re standing, if you sit down, doesn’t it feel like rest?
There are many ways of resting.
The most important thing is rest means you’re changing the energy equation
where consumption is lowered,
production is going on at the same pace.
So after a period of time, you feel rejuvenated
because consumption has been lowered.
Essentially you’re managing the energy equation.
If you’re on acute activity, the consumption is more;
whatever you’re producing it’s not enough,
after some time you feel exhausted because
the consumption has been heavy.
If you lower the consumption and increase the production,
after sometime you feel energized.
Suppose you’re running, if you run a mile,
after that you can’t take another step, let’s say.
Oh, many of you have been running for Isha marathons,
Isha Vidya marathons,
forty, forty-two kilometers, all right, whenever
after a mile or two you can’t take another step,
don’t eat anything,
don’t drink anything,
just sit down for ten minutes,
again you’re fine, rejuvenated, isn’t it?
All you have done is lowered the consumption,
production is still at the same level.
So now there are ways to lower the consumption
and increase the productivity also.
So if you come to a certain state of ease
When I say ease,
it’s not something that most people will ever understand
because most people are not at ease.
If you’re at total ease,
if the system is at total ease,
everything is at ease;
it is well rested, always it is rested.
Because it’s so rested throughout the day,
if you sleep in the afternoon,
do you see you can’t sleep much in the night?
Yes?
Oh, you’re already experimenting?
If you sleep in the afternoon you can’t sleep much in the night
unless you’re sick
or you’re very tired because of something,
because it’s well rested in the day, it can’t sleep in the night.
So you don’t have to necessarily sleep.
If you sit here also,
if your body is resting,
you will see your sleep quota will naturally shrink.
How to increase the quality of sleep?
Don’t try to increase the quality of sleep.
The ideal way to live is there is no sleep in my life,
but that’s not possible right now,
still body has some inertia,
so it sleeps minimum,
rest of the time it is at ease.
If you keep this at ease
then sleep does not occur to the body
unless it comes to a certain point of exhaustion.
So body is never ever asking for sleep
but it is definitely asking for rest.
If you do not know how to sit here in a restful manner,
it’ll try to rest like this… (Gestures) (Laughter)
If you can sit here totally at ease,
it’ll sit here for hours without falling asleep.
Otherwise this is the only way it knows how to rest. (Gestures)
So do not try to increase the quality of sleep,
there’s no such thing.
Just learn to keep your body restful and at ease, consciously.
If you sit here now,
one simple thing you can do is, you sit down,
you come and sit down here,
just move your attention from the top of your head, down to your toes
and see if everything is lose and easy and relaxed and at ease
are you sitting like this? (Gestures) (Laughter)
If you sit, just bring this to ease as much as you can.
Not everything is in your conscious level
as much as you can, consciously bring it to ease.
You will see suddenly if you are the kind who will fall asleep at ten o’clock,
if you simply… one hour if you sit here at ease,
you will see your sleep will get postponed by half-an-hour,
you won’t feel sleepy at ten,
naturally you are awake.
So instead of trying to increase the sleep quality
no,
you increase the quality of life.
If you increase the quality of life,
when I say increasing the quality of life,
nothing in your life, whatever you may be doing,
from simple breathing to any complex activity that you do in your life,
the quality of that will not improve
if you cannot do it with ease.
Is that so?
Hmm?
Only when you can do something with total ease
Let’s say you’re riding a bicycle,
if you’re riding like this, like this (Gestures)
you can’t say you’re enjoying your cycling.
If you can ride it with ease, with so much ease
that even if you take off your hands, it’ll go only straight,
the way you want it to go, you are at ease.
Because you’re at ease,
the quality of your cycling has improved, isn’t it?
So these two things are connected.
So if you enhance the quality of your life,
naturally sleep quota will go down.
If your quality of your life goes bad,
you can’t do anything with ease,
then also you cannot sleep.
But stressfully you cannot sleep,
not because you’re well rested you cannot sleep,
you cannot sleep because you’re stressed out.
If you do this, you will not live long.
If you… if your body does not get enough rest,
it will die,
it will break
something will go.
If you’re not at ease, that means you are in dis-ease (Laughter);
you’re heading there.
You are in dis-ease means you’re in a certain state of ill-health.
But if we say you’re deceased (Word happens to sound as ‘dis-eased’), that means you’re dead. (Laughter)
So don’t move into the direction of dis-ease,
move into direction of ease.
If you become totally ease,
sleep quality… sleep quota will come down.
Quality of sleep will be good
because quality of life is good.
You want to increase only the quality of your sleep,
life does not work like that.
If you wake up well in the morning,
you’ll also sleep well in the night. (Laughs)
There’s a whole lot of systems
To give this to people,
in the eastern cultures,
in India particularly,
all these systems are built into one’s life -
of course they’re throwing it away because they all became modern.
Modern means to be distressed,
constantly in tension,
agitated,
worked up about everything, that means you’re really modern.
Otherwise traditionally all these things were built in –
from morning when you wake up till you go to sleep,
what you should do,
how you should handle yourself,
all these things were fixed.
Till the beginning of this generation, everybody was aware,
suddenly they all became English-educated
and they become modern and tense. (Laughter)
Otherwise this was called achara vichara,
what to do, what not to do,
everything is built from morning to night,
all aspects of life,
how to do it.
If you do it like that so that you can do everything with ease,
as much ease as possible.
So those who were not able to dedicate their life to yoga and spiritual process,
for them it was built into natural culture.
At least this much ease you know,
so that you wake up happily and go to sleep and sleep well.
Even today this is a thing that they will say in India,
if you
if people say, ‘What’s happened, you know, this happened, that happened in my life,’
they say, ‘That’s okay, but in my life if I lie down I sleep well.’
Hmm?
He might have made so much money, it's okay, but I sleep well.’ (Laughter)
You see… hear this?
People say this, it's part of the cultural expression.
‘I sleep well,’ means, ‘I’m living well.
Only because I live well I can sleep well.
If I’m not living well, I cannot sleep well.
So do not try to increase the… improve the quality of your sleep.
improve the quality of your life
then you will naturally sleep well also.
Sadhguru: Essentially naturally if death happens,
why death is happening is
because these life energies are programmed in a certain way.
There are different dimensions of karma;
one that you are in touch with right now is referred to as prarabdha;
this is a certain software.
So a certain amount of prarabdha is there within you,
so life process is working it out.
If life has to be embodied
it must be in a certain level of intensity,
a certain range of intensity,
a certain band of
like certain frequency it must be there.
If it becomes too intense and goes above,
it will leave the body
then we say he attained samadhi
because life energies became too intense
but the physical body cannot contain it anymore.
Or if it becomes feeble beneath a certain point
then it’ll slip out;
this is called ‘dying naturally, out of old age.’
People just lie down;
close their eyes and
people died of old age.
Nothing broke,
nothing broke;
his liver didn’t go wrong,
his kidneys didn’t go wrong,
his heart didn’t go wrong;
simply life became feeble and slipped out.
That means he lived his full term.
Whatever this particular life was programmed for
it saw its full course;
so it leaves.
But very few rare human beings leave
because of excessive intensity;
a few,
a certain number leave because of old age;
most of the others die because something broke.
Either you crashed your car
or you smoked yourself to death
or you drank yourself to death
or something else broke;
you worked yourself to death,
whatever -
in some way you made the physical body inhospitable for life.
Something went wrong in this mechanism;
now it cannot host a life,
so life leaves.
But still it is in a certain level of intensity
that it could have continued to be embody for much longer period.
When life leaves like this
then it cannot find another body immediately;
it has to hang.
Let's say
no, I don’t want to take you or your mother as a example;
let us somebody had
by normal course he would have died after 10 years
but today because of excessive work or stress or whatever
his heart broke and died today.
Ten more years were there for him approximately.
This is all depends how he lives.
These 10 years if he lives in a certain way
it could be worked out in two years
or it could be worked out in 20 years;
it depends on various things
but let us assume there was 10 years approximate life
but he left the body.
Because he’s left the body,
because he’s lost the discriminatory mind,
because he’s lost the ability to perform any kind of karma
as such,
because of this
these 10 years may be 100 years without the body.
With the body, with the discriminatory mind
this would have been over in 10 years
but without the body,
without a discriminatory mind
this may take 100 years or 500 years;
we do not know.
It depends on various things;
depending upon the karmic substance;
what kind of karmic substance he carries.
Knowing these things
because most people die of infections and diseases and ailments and things
so we created a whole science
as to how to help them beyond their body.
We could not help them when they were in the body
because we couldn’t figure out what is the ailment,
what is the disease;
he did not get the treatment;
something happened, he died.
Now we want to help him in such a way
that he dissolves this quick,
that he doesn’t hang around for too long.
So there is a whole science behind that.
So this man for whom you gave the cow money
you are giving him because his great great super great grandfather knew what to do.
So you are still paying him for that knowledge
that the super grandfather knew
but this fool also should have learnt
but somewhere it all got dislocated.
Now it's just become a plain ritual
that he’s learnt a few mantras
and you don't know what it is to check.
He could be abusing you in Sanskrit.
As you felt terrible about him,
he must have looked at you and he was abusing you in Sanskrit language.
You don't know.
Probably you were cursing him
and he was cursing you and your mother
Cow business is happening
but nothing else is happening.
So these things have unfortunately happened
because modern societies have
are becoming more and more superficial by the day,
more and more superficial by the day
for which we’ll pay a price.
Here and hereafter,
in both we will pay a very big price
because we are becoming extremely superficial with the life process.
All those things we should not have business
has become business isn't it?
See there are a few things
which should never be commercialized;
education,
health,
spiritual process -
these three should never be commercialized.
Once these three things are commercialized
that society is heading down.
It may take sometime but it’ll head down.
We are picking that up in India in a big way now.
So we will see an economic boom
because cow business will happen a lot for sometime.
And then we will head down.
There is no other way.
So a few things should be kept off commerce;
it's extremely important.
That is why we are looking for volunteers all the time
so that dedicated people conduct certain things
not people who are looking for livelihood.
AnupamKher: Suppose
hypothetical question, I must announce that before
suppose you were made the prime minister of this country for one month,
how will you change things?
Sadhguru: See, there are enough instruments in the democratic process.
Making me or anybody a prime minister for one month is a cruel thing. (Laughter)
AnupamKher: Okay, for five years.
Sadhguru: Yes. (Laughter)
AnupamKher: So you admit that one month is not sufficient?
I understand.
Sadhguru: No, because one month is a very cruel joke.
It doesn’t matter who
who comes to power for one month, he can’t do anything in a nation
as diverse as India.
To get this nation moving
you need to understand this
you cannot move this nation with policy,
with rules.
You can only move this nation when anything that you want to achieve in this country
you make it a movement.
If you do not make it a movement,
if people do not emotionally connect to that,
no rules, no policy is going to work in this country.
It is only people who have been implanted from somewhere,
who have not grown up with Indian people, who do not understand this.
They think if you make a rule everything is going to work.
This is not Switzerland –
if youannounce on the notice board everybody will follow. (Laughs)
Here you have to make a movement out of it;
you have to make emotionally
people connect emotionally to what needs to be achieved.
If you’re not able to do that, nothing is ever going to happen.
So whoever becomes the prime minister,
I don’t want to imagine myself there
AnupamKher: Okay. What do you think should be done?
Sadhguru: It can be very easily done.
There are examples of states which are going leaps and bounds ahead.
If you saw Bihar just ten years ago,
it was just
I have driven through Bihar just wanting to see what Bihar is –
it was… it just looked like Afghanistan, large parts of it.
Today things are happening,
wonderful things are happening, just one man.
Things are happening in Gujarat, just one man.
So can’t we produce twenty five men or women like that in this country for every state?
(Applause)
Are we so impotent that we cannot produce twenty five human beings
with some integrity who will do something straight for this nation?
And today you don’t have to do much.
India is sitting on a boom time,
you just have to just manage a few things and let it happen, that’s all.
You just have to see that economic process do not go out of control,
you just have to manage that, you don’t have to do anything,
it’s boom time, the whole world is looking towards you.
The only two economies everybody is banking on is right now China and India.
India is better equipped because it’s a democracy,
because all the numbers are scrutinized,
but what is in China cannot be scrutinized,
so many people are very suspicious and fearful,
because it’s supported by the government.
India has a proper corporate structure,
India has a reliable stock market, which is a reading.
Indian market is open, you can study what you want,
you know where you’re putting your money,
so definitely India would be a natural destination for every investor in the world,
only thing is they’re afraid of our
AnupamKher: System
Sadhguru: Corruption, not the system.
They like our system. Our corruption
AnupamKher: Corrupt system.
Sadhguru: System is not corrupt.
AnupamKher: Corruption.
Sadhguru: Corruption. (Laughter)
The reason… (Laughs) it’s the people who are manning it
AnupamKher: He has a way of making me say things that he wants me to say. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: No, no, the people who are manning it
people who are manning it are the problem.
AnupamKher: But how do we find them?
You mentioned two states –
you mentioned Gujarat and you mentioned Bihar
and strangely they are not the states which we have in the center.
So how do we
are we politically corrupt
politically completely bankrupt?
How do we do that?
Sadhguru: it is only because common people are not participating in the democratic process.
Participating in the democratic process does not just mean once in five years you cast your vote –
most people don’t even do that –
but I’m saying even if you do that, that is not enough.
Democracy is an active sport; it’s not a spectator’s sport.
You can’t sit back and say ‘Let somebody do democracy.’
Democracy means you are the boss, you can’t sleep on it,
you have to be active to everything around you.
If you do not bring that consciousness in people,
that awareness and activism in people, it’ll not work.
At the same time, for everything you protest, for everything you call a bandh,
for everything, you know,
it’s our culture.
People have understood the technology of how to stop the nation –
bandh, hartaal –
but how to run the nation, it’s a different technology. (Applause)
I am saying, at least once a month in your street, in your region,
whatever is the sticking points in your area, in your street,
just make a list of that, get a few people together,
whoever the councilor, the MLA,
call him for a meeting, talk to him what needs to happen.
Casting vote once in five years is not good enough,
because you employ somebody and you don’t see that he works
that is not… doesn’t make sense, isn't it? (Applause)
Sadhguru: After all, moon is a satellite for this planet
and helplessly strung to this planet and making its rounds.
So, what is the significance?
Why these full moons and no moons are held significant?
Probably many of you know that
you may not know -
I hope you do not know this by experience.
You should know that
if someone is mentally disturbed
on a full moon day, on a new moon day
they get little more disturbed than usual.
You’re aware of this? Hmm?
Happens to you? (Laughter)
Sir, yourself, you just be with me, don’t worry about the camera. (Laughs)
So, it doesn’t happen to you
but it does happen to somebody.
So, it is not that moon instigates madness,
it is just that when the moon takes certain positions
it heightens whatever you are.
If you are loving you become more loving.
If you are joyful you become more joyful.
If you are blissful you become much more blissful.
If you are little insane you become much more insane.
If you are meditative you become far more meditative.
It just enhances everything that you are.
So, we considered these days important
so that you consciously create the right kind of quality in you
so that it gets enhanced.
Today is Poornami,
in the morning you get up and you be in a certain way,
you create a certain quality in you
so that by evening that quality is enhanced.
So, whatever the qualities that you are,
so that you start engineering it more consciously
than being a victim of unconscious eruptions within yourself.
So, the moon is not …does not make you mad or meditative,
it just enhances whatever you are.
You know, even the ocean goes mad?
If you...
if you are a swimmer on the beach
it's madness for you
but if you are a skipper of a large vessel it is a boon for you (Laughs)
but something is happening.
The very ocean is trying to rise.
When the very ocean is trying to rise,
the situation may be conducive for you also to rise probably,
if you are willing to make use of it.
And moon’s influence on human life is far more than that.
To do anything with yourself,
to be aware where the moon is could be useful
because it creates different types of qualities and energies in the system.
If one is aware he could make use of it.
In English language moon is lunar.
If you take a step further you become a lunatic. (Laughs)
So, generally the influence of the moon is considered illogical.
Anything illogical generally in the West got labeled as madness
or insanity,
but here we always saw the limitations of logic.
Logic is very useful to conduct the material aspect of your life.
If you want to do your business,
you want to build a house,
you want to do all the things in the world
you have to be logical; there is no other way to conduct it.
This is the problem with us
to conduct the outside we call the divine,
to conduct the inward we try to go at it logically;
both won't work for us.
So, when it comes to subjective dimensions of life,
if you are not willing to step beyond the limitations of your logic
then nothing ever will happen.
If I ask you to close your eyes and do something very simple,
you sit here and calculate “Okay, if I do this what will I get?
What will happen? This, this, this…” -
nothing will ever happen to you!
If anything beautiful has to touch you in your life,
if meditation has to touch you,
if love has to touch you,
if bliss has to touch you, you must be illogical.
Everything is logically correct but you have a long face
because everything is correct with you. (Laughs)
You are correct but life doesn’t work like that.
If you wake up in the morning
tomorrow morning when you wake up,
lying down in your bed,
think 100% logically.
Do not think of all those beautiful moments in your life,
do not go back to any experience which matters to you,
do not think of the birds in the sky,
the sunrise,
the flowers in your garden,
your child’s face or a loving moment in your life,
don’t look at any of that,
just think logically.
Now, you actually have to get out of bed,
that’s not a small feat.
Hmm?
Is it a small feat?
It's not a small feat.
And then you have to go to the toilet,
then you have to eat,
work,
eat,
work,
eat,
go to sleep.
Again tomorrow morning same thing.
Cut out the experiential aspect,
think of your life 100% logically
and see you have to do the same damn things for the next 30, 40, 50 years,
and if you do yoga, it gets elongated. (Laughter)
It gets stretched further, you know.
The same nonsense everyday, everyday, everyday just think logically,
is it worth it?
Is it worthwhile?
Is it worthwhile?
No.
Moments of extreme logic are moments of suicide
and all of you have been committing suicide like this
but you don’t do anything these days in one shot,
you do everything in installments.
You are committing suicide also in installments.
I want you to just look back
if you are unable to look back,
when you go home today
I want you to rummage into your old pictures and see
when you were 5, 6-six years of age how your face was,
it was like this… (Gestures - Laughter)
Now, (Gestures) (Laughs)
it's getting longer and longer.
So, if you have to step out of your logic,
unless you do it in a certain way,
it sounds senseless
because right now your idea of sense is only logical, isn't it?
But please see, the most beautiful moments in your life have happened to you
only when you kept your logic aside a little bit.
Yes?
Logically examine your love affair and see,
it’ll be the most stupid thing you can do,
really.
Yes or no?
Maybe it's the most beautiful thing in your life
but logically dissect your love affair and look at it,
it is the most idiotic thing you can do
but it might have become the most beautiful experience in your life.
So, the logical dimension of life
and the experiential possibility of who you are
are diametrically opposite.
So, in yoga we look at you as two aspects - the sun and the moon.
You have seen the symbolism?
You have heard of the word Hata
Hata yoga?
Hata means… ha means sun,
ta means moon.
So, these are the two dimensions.
There are various symbolisms for this.
You have seen Shiva being represented as half man, half woman,
all these things to suggest
there is a logical dimension to you
and there’s a dimension beyond that.
If you do not explore both
you will be an incomplete human being
or you will be only half alive.
So, when we say a spiritual process or yoga or whatever,
what we are looking at is how to become a fullfledged life process,
not a half life process.
Just the body is alive, that’s not good enough.
Everything in you should be aflame,
only then you will see…,
whether something is happening or nothing is happening,
it's worth being here.
If you sit here, it's worth being here.
If you open your eyes it's worth being here,
if you close your eyes it's worth being here
otherwise whatever is happening it’s not worth being here
simply because only a part of you is alive,
the other part has… is yet to come alive.
So, the moon
today being a full moon,
the clouds are hiding it but don’t worry,
whether you can see it or not
the influence of the moon is very much there.
Because, on a no moon day or a new moon day
the influence of the moon is far more than on the full moon day.
So, whether you perceive something or do not perceive something is not the issue;
the influence is anyway there.
There is a logical element to you which helps you to handle the material well.
There is a dimension beyond logic,
without it the subjective dimensions can never be accessed.
The moon is a symbolic representation of that dimension.
DilipCherian: some senses the tragedy that has just happened in Uttarakhand
natural tragedies of this kind make one think about –
one, why do they happen?
Two, is it part of a much greater divine mystery
and to what extent is human degradation responsible for natural calamities?
Sadhguru: Human being is not the center of this universe.
He can rise to a state where he can imbibe the universe –
he can contain the universe within himself in terms of his experience.
Such a possibility is there for one who explores,
but the making of the universe,
the making of the solar system
and even the planet is not human centric.
That is, every other life on the planet and everywhere else,
every other form of life, not necessarily physical,
all of them have a role to play.
So, what is being construed as calamity
is not really a calamity –
a cloudburst is not a calamity.
A mega wave in the ocean which you call as tsunami is not a calamity.
An earthquake is not a calamity.
Mother earth just stretches herself a little bit
and a thousand people die and we think it’s a calamity.
Right now, if wind blows hard,
the mosquito population here in the garden thinks it’s a calamity
because all their relatives got blown away.
Understand? (Laughs)
So, our state is not any different.
So, there is no such thing as natural calamity.
because everything has a certain lifespan –
whether it’s individual human being or the planet
or the solar system or the universe has a lifespan,
maybe not comparable to our lifespan,
so we think it’s eternal, but it all has a lifespan,
so it is going through a certain cyclical process.
In this process,
if an earthquake happened a thousand years ago,
people would have just felt the tremors
and they thought God is angry and they would have kept quiet.
Sadhguru: Not too many would have died,
because somewhere an earthquake happens,
we did not span across the planet as we do today.
Today we are too many
we are nice, but we are too many. (Laughs)
Because we are too many
if one wave comes, twenty five thousand people will die;
one cloudburst, close to twenty thousand people die;
It is just we are a calamity,
we are in the way of everything
without understanding anything.
We are trying to live on the planet without having a clue about
what is the nature of the planet, how it functions,
what are its requirements –
without any of this understanding
or making an accommodation for that,
we just simply
we are too overjoyed with our own ability to do a few petty things
we are too enamored with our own petty intellect.
I think this is an evolutionary problem.
DilipCherian: The …religions of the book… of the book, the religions which have come
thereafter
have in many senses either deliberately
or because of design by the people who designed them,
lost that fundamental tenet of the belief in the self.
Because you, all the religions of the book go away from
the more earlier forms of animism,
the understanding of… of rocks, of… of stone, of mystic places,
all those have in some senses been lost.
Is that therefore devolution instead of evolution in modern thinking
and religion… religious thinking?
Sadhguru: Definitely not evolution.
Devolution is not a strong enough word,
because it is a complete backward step,
in the sense –
this whole idea that the existence is human-centric comes from this.
DilipCherian: Yes.
Sadhguru: Comes from these religions.
Before these religions came,
if you look at any other form of spiritual processes happening anywhere in the world,
whether it’s the Australian aborigines or India for that matter
or Africa or North America, South America,
wherever you see,
everybody recognized the significance of every other life on level with human life.
DilipCherian: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whether it is an ant or a bird or an insect or a rock
or anything was recognized as significant as a human being
because it is simple sense to understand
what the soil that you walk upon is what you carry as your body right now.
This simple sense is completely taken away
because everything that is universe is in a… is sitting in a book.
DilipCherian: Yes.
Sadhguru: And (Laughs) you got to agree with the book, otherwise you are dead.
DilipCherian: That’s it.
When certain structures are made in the making of a civilization,
in the making of a future for human beings or a set of human beings
or the whole humanity, whichever way,
either you can bank on human intelligence and create those things
or you can bank it on human consciousness and do those things
or you can bank on human baseness and fear and insecurity and do those things.
Unfortunately, most religions have chosen to address
the baseness and fear in the human being rather than his
all-inclusive consciousness or even his intellect for that matter.
So, the prayers in India were never asking.
There was no such thing as prayer actually.
Invocations and methods of worship
scientific methods of doing things and invocations.
So, the only prayer was
“Let me be destroyed the way I am,
so that the bigger possibility manifest within me.”
you just look at it today ninety nine percent of the prayers are just this.
“Give me this, give me that, save me, protect me.”
Does it look like survival or does it look like spiritual process or religion to you?
Just survival.
You are rooting your survival through heaven.
It’s a very inefficient way of doing it.
DilipCherian: But every religion has succumbed to this,
you know, half the poojas, half the stones people were,
half the, you know, processes they conduct in temples are all fundamentally part of an ‘ask’.
And ‘ask’ is the cornerstone of religion’s survival,
because… because you ask, you give, because you expect.
Sadhguru: I want you to… I want you to look at this.
This can become a major study
if you walk into any ancient temple,
you will see none of the processes are about asking.
There is no room to ask.
There is no room for adulation nor for asking,
just scientific processes.
One thing that you must see, Dilip, is
there is something called as Sapta RishiPooja
in the
in Kashi.
This happened when Adiyogi gave this knowledge to the Sapta Rishis.
It went on for a very long time.
Then he told them to go across the world and spread it.
See, when Sapta Rishis were leaving Adiyogi,
having been with him,
having shared this phenomenal science,
having experienced it, they were not very eager to leave him and go.
So they said, “If we go away, how do we again see you?
You are sending us off that we will never come back.
How do we do?”
Then he told them,
“You do this. I am with you.”
DilipCherian: Okay.
Sadhguru: So, he taught them Sapta Rishi Pooja.
DilipCherian: Okay.
Sadhguru: It’s today called Sapta Rishi Pooja, I don’t know what he called it.
These ordinary priests who are doing it probably for money today,
maybe not entirely –
probably they respect the tradition that’s offered them this,
but money has become an important part of that,
they are just doing the procedure in a certain way.
You will be amazed,
the stacks and stacks of energy that they build up there.
See, we can do this in a different way if the necessary protected atmosphere is there.
I will build it up in a certain way.
In our programs, in things… we do things like this.
DilipCherian: Sure.
Sadhguru: But, these are not people who have any internal capacity.
They are just doing a process, outside process,
which is so absolutely amazing that
though the individual performing it –
this is pure technology.
you don’t know one thing about your cellphone,
but you know how to use it, you can speak to America.
It’s just like that.
These guys themselves know nothing,
but they are just sticking to the procedure
and it’s working miraculously.
Miraculously means I was just flabbergasted.
I couldn’t believe.
I always have a certain disdain for temple priests
and the way things are conducted.
I suddenly bowed down to them and said,
“Okay, this is great.”
If you kept it for fifteen thousand years without distorting it,
we have to, you know… (Laughs) bow down to you.
whoever you may be right now.
DilipCherian: what yoga means, which is the whole concept of unity.
Unfortunately, both in India and elsewhere,
even this concept is getting diluted is you will say and I am hesitant to use
Sadhguru: Distorted.
DilipCherian: …is distorted,
and distorted to an extent where it is almost unrecognizable.
A lot of so-called yoga gurus have partitioned the whole
compartmentalized it as to a form of physical exercise
and have lost out the core of that whole
the whole concept of it
But, do you think that this breaking up is again an expression of
where we are, consciousness, humanity, togetherness, all of that?
Sadhguru: Just ignorance.
DilipCherian: Okay.
No, but what happens to yoga?
Since your… since this is an area which you are
Sadhguru: Now, the California court ruled
that if yoga has to enter the schools,
you must remove all the Indian names.
So, Padmasana is being renamed as “Crisscross Applesauce.” (Laughter)
DilipCherian: You are joking.
Sadhguru: I am not joking.
DilipCherian: Crisscross applesauce?
Sadhguru: Yes.
To teach the children crisscross applesauce Tshshsh,
it looks like Padmasana. (Laughter)
So, (Laughs) I must cry, but I am laughing. (Laughter)
DilipCherian: I know.
This is weep worthy.
Sadhguru: In terms of yoga getting all distorted,
it is a serious concern because
the type of yoga that is going on
particularly, you know I
though I come from the stables of Hata Yoga,
I never thought I should teach Hata Yoga
because I didn’t want to put people through such long processes,
because I have (Claps) other ways of doing things.
I thought we will never really teach Hata Yoga
except as a preparation for some long meditation programs,
just forty days - sixty days kind of preparation.
But, then the last five-six years,
I have seen many
I think I have taken off at least
at least two dozen reasonably popular yoga teachers in America
to stop teaching.
Because I just pointed out what they were doing
and how it is impacting their lives.
See, doing improper yoga is not just that they are going to hurt their body,
they will bring calamities into their life.
Because what you
what you need to understand is Hata Yoga–
the simple physical form of yoga is a way of aligning your system with the cosmic geometry.
DilipCherian: So, if you do it wrong, it’s dangerous?
Sadhguru: If you do it wrong,
you not just may cause physical damage,
you will bring situations in your life,
which are completely disastrous for you.
Whether your life works smoothly and constantly successfully
or constantly you are in a pit
depends on how well aligned or you are dis-aligned with the whole process.
So, Hata Yoga is one way of aligning.
It is a more, physically probably in today’s world more difficult way of doing it,
but there is a certain beauty to it
because it gives you health,
it gives you well-being, at the same time, it gives you success and focus and
a different level of blissfulness in the body,
which very few people experience.
If you just sit here, how my… my body feels right now,
I won’t exchange this for anything.
So, why you don’t go for a drink or a drug or something else,
which is physically whatever is simply because
you are in a better state than all those things.
If I was miserable, maybe I would also drink. (Laughs)
DilipCherian: Yeah.
Sadhguru: If there is something going to elevate you for some time,
why don’t you do it?
But, when everything is so fantastic,
why do you want to mess it up with something?
That is the question.
It’s… it’s not a moral decision.
It is just a question of
DilipCherian: Physical need.
Sadhguru: No,
if you are living in a better place,
why do you want to come down to a more gross
and you know basic kind of thing.
So, when you are able to manage your own chemistry the way you want it,
why would you want to throw chemicals into the system?
It’s as simple as that.
So, when I saw this yogic systems which are growing and becoming popular in America,
I wouldn’t like to name (Laughs) people and whatever
because… for many reasons.
For example, these days it’s become a fad for people to do yoga in forty two degree centigrade temperature.
The classical yoga always prescribes –
if you do any yogic process, you must either do it
before eight thirty or nine in the morning
or after four, four thirty in the evening,
because you must do it in the cooler hours.
When you do any yogic practice, particularly Hata Yoga,
you will develop an enormous amount of ushna.
Ushna is not to be understood as temperature alone.
It causes temperature, but it is not temperature by itself.
The whole ayurvedic system functions on ushna, chitta, and pitha.
DilipCherian: Yes, absolutely.
Sadhguru: So, ushna is one aspect because
the yogi always wants to keep his ushna slightly above the normal.
He wants to be hot.
because… for various reasons.
If your body
because the yogi’s main concern is his perception,
that he wants his perception to be unhindered.
So, anything that comes in its way,
he wants it to be burnt out in the system.
He does not want any excess mucus in the system,
he does not want any excess fluids in the system.
He wants to keep it slightly hotter than what is normal.
So, when you practice Hata Yoga,
the whole system is created to generate that ushna.
So, always you must do it in the cooler hours,
otherwise it will go and cause cellular damage.
So, now they are doing yoga at forty two degree centigrade.
When I saw this, this is insanity.
Anyway, if… if you allow these things to happen for a period of time,
one day medical research will come and show you
how doing yoga destroys your system.
It’s not far away.
Already some articles in New York Times have come
and they become… they have been circularized all over
DilipCherian: Yes, yes, yes.
Sadhguru: …how yoga is damaging to the system.
If you allow this kind of yoga to flourish,
that will be the conclusion in another five to ten years
and immediately everybody will drop it.
Right now, it’s rising without any papacy anywhere.
Simply, by its sheer efficacy, it’s just rising all over the world.
You will kill that.
So that’s the reason I decided we must train Hata Yoga teachers in classical Hata Yoga–
twenty one weeks,
a dedicated focused time.
They have never been through any training in their life like this.
They think being a yoga teacher means
dressing up in a certain way and you know,
using a few Indian words,
this makes them into… (Laughs)
DilipCherian: And producing a video.
Sadhguru: Yeah.
So, now we are really putting them through works,
twenty one weeks
and this will produce definitely more stable teachers
who will take yoga in its right format,
so that tomorrow if somebody is doing yoga,
any kind of scientific study you conduct on them should be an absolute thumbs up for sure,
on all levels –
physically, psychologically, emotionally, and in ways that
they don’t understand
Devi Shetty: As a doctor,
as a surgeon,
we are involved with major surgical interventions.
Unfortunately in our business,
this is the only business in the world
where a customer can die.
Sadhguru: No, no, taxi drivers
Devi Shetty: It’s however much you try Sadhguru
to dissociate ourselves,
when you are operating
you need to concentrate and do the job
but what comes to your mind is
the young wife, young children waiting outside.
The margin of error is very small
few millimeters here and there.
Then you think what are the consequences on them,
then you start thinking about when you are a kid,
if something happens to your father
where you would have been.
We are after all human beings,
we are always torn between
what we do to somebody and
what could have happened to our own life?
It’s a constant tension,
how do we overcome it?
I’ve been in this profession for more than thirty years,
still I haven’t yet mastered
the art of dissociating myself from the patient’s life.
(Sadhguru): Yes, when you are given a certain responsibility
which could determine the shape and scope of people’s lives
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: …it’s a big thing to carry on one’s shoulders.
But the important thing is
that somebody has chosen to place such a responsibility in our hands,
it’s a tremendous privilege.
If we execute it,
can we do the best?
We can never do the best
but we can do the best that we can do -
always with life.
Is it the best?
No,
we are doing our best.
If we lack in that then we have a serious problem.
But if we’re doing our best in everything that we do,
we know it is not the best
but it’s our best, we’ve not spared anything,
that’s good.
And above all when you refer to yourself as human being -
“after all we are human beings,”
this is a big problem.
This will reduce our best
that is people are always using the word human being
as a limitation,
as a compulsiveness,
as a small thing.
We are not referring to the word or term human being
as a possibility.
Instead of saying, “we are just human beings,”
why don’t we say, “we are human beings”
we’re great, we are doing so many things,
we can replace the damn heart
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: Isn’t it?
Devi Shetty: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: Now replacing a part of a machine
is not a big thing.
It’s like this,
shall I tell you a joke?
It’s okay?
It just came to me when I saw you
So
a cardiac surgeon,
took his Aston Martin which was giving him a little bit of trouble,
engine trouble
to the mechanic.
So he said by evening he’ll have it ready.
After his hospital job he went there to pick up his car.
It was not ready.
The mechanic was swaggering around a little bit
and he said,
“Hey Doc! Why is it, I do the car’s engines, you do people’s engines”
after all a pumping thing, you know
Devi Shetty: Yes, Yes.
Sadhguru: “…why is it that you earn in millions,
I just make a few bucks?
Come tomorrow doc,
we’ll fix it.”
So the doctor looked at him and said,
“Try to fix the engine when it’s running.”
That’s a important thing,
you got to keep it running and fix it
Devi Shetty: Yes,
How much of your life is happening from outside around you how much of it is just your psychological structure

This is something distinctly. You must draw a line on this
What is right now ? We're sitting here. What's happening here ?
What am I doing within myself this distinct line if you set up  what is happening in my mind ?
What is happening around me - two different things these are two different things, isn't it?
Whatever happens here you can react anything these two things are same
Right now somebody is going to call you a fool now I will
Now what happens within you?
Is yours the word fool is mine, but what happens within you is yours isn't it yes or no
Because the word fool is not hurtful in any way. It's not a bullet
Only because the way you respond or react
Things happen this distinction you must set up in your life. What is mine? What am I doing?
What is the world doing to me ?
If you look at this
The world is hardly doing anything to you it is not even interested in you most of the time?
Most of the things are your own stuff and you think the world is doing all this to you. Yes or no
if you set up this distinction, what is my
My contribution to all the rubbish that I am what is the world's contribution you will see the world is doing
precious Little ballooning
very little
Rest is all yours
Now what is yours if you take charge?
Ninety-eight percent of your life is transformed two percent leave it to me. I will take it for you
Yes
It's very simple, but this distinction has not been drawn
People are in and out for every small thing that happens a million things happen inside, isn't it?
this whole chemical soup
Of a body it is responding to every little thing
Every thought every idea every emotion every
Reverberation that you create. It's responding
now
Whether you have a wonderful soup or a lousy soup
depends how much attention you're paying to the soup making isn't it if you know this is your work?
You will do your work the way you want it
If you do not recognize, this is my work
It happens widely accidentally
Questioner: So, my question is,
India is a young nation
and one of the biggest problem,
which we are facing today, is
the health disorders,
which the young nation is actually going through.
The lifestyle disorders are increasing by the day
and this is actually going to affect
the productivity of the nation as we go forward.
So my question to you is that
in spirituality and according to you,
what can we do
to manage the stress
and manage these lifestyle disorders
and lifestyle issues
as we go forward,
because that’s the least time which we give to ourselves?
Thank you very much.
Sadhguru: I would like to correct the question.
We are not a young nation.
We are the oldest nation on the planet, okay (Applause),
because if you are only looking at
India’s Constitution
or a political setup as nationhood,
yes, we are a young nation.
But even 10,000 years ago,
people outside this country
though inside the country,
we had over two hundred political entities
people from outside called the entire nation as Hindustan,
or Bharat,
or whatever.
People recognized,
both inside and outside,
this is one nation,
though it was ruled by many political heads
or systems as such,
because we became a nation
not because of our political bosses,
not because of a certain Constitution.
We became a nation because
we never had a belief in anything.
We have always been seekers,
we always wondered about life,
we sought what is the truth.
Every generation has to seek
what is the truth about my life.
Well, Krishna has already said it.
Maybe what he said is true for him.
With all due respect,
we have to explore for ourselves,
what is the nature of the truth of our life.
This is the freedom that this nation offered to us,
so we were bound by these strings of seeking,
not believing.
Usually, most nations are made out of sameness.
We did not fall for that mediocrity,
that we have to be all same to be one.
Each one can be different.
Within the same family,
five people worship five different gods,
but no problem with us.
So, this is a unique nation.
This should not be destroyed –its ethos
of everybody can be
whatever the hell they want to be
and still we are one nation.
This nation has existed for the longest period of time
simply because of this lack of rigidity within itself.
Now we are trying to… put rigid lines.
If you do that,
it won't last long.
It's very important to know this.
About health,
we’ve always known how to be healthy.
If you believe
for these 1.2 billion people,
you are going to create
a healthcare system like United States has (Laughs),
you
you don’t know what you’re talking about.
You’ve just not seen the country,
nor have you seen United States,
nor have you looked at the systems that United States has.
In spite of that,
three-trillion-dollar bill of their healthcare
is going to sink that nation
if they continue the same way for another few years.
Yes.
It's going to sink that nation
because three trillion dollars,
it's bigger than our budget.
So if you think you’re going to create a healthcare system like that,
it's going to be a disaster.
I think the present government has done one significant thing,
that is the AYUSH (Referring to the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy, abbreviated as AYUSH ministry) ministry.
It is still not well-funded
but once it is well-funded
and if we manage to roll it out the way we should
because Isha Foundation was the first pilot project of our AYUSH
about eight years ago in the Namakkal district in Tamil Nadu.
It produced phenomenal results for one district,
just teaching people how to be healthy in rural India.
And we started hundreds of herbal gardens,
with which people are taught.
In public places, these gardens were raised,
where people can go
and make use of the herbs
for different day-to-day ailments that they come to.
Something very serious happens,
they can go to the hospital.
I want you to know
just one or two generations ago,
when your grandmothers were alive,
if a child got a stomachache,
nobody went to the doctor.
Child got little fever,
nobody went to the doctor.
They knew what to do.
Today, for everything,
you’re going to the doctor
because it's become an industry.
As you say, it is not health,
it is medicine, okay?
It is about fuelling pharmaceutical industries.
I’m not against pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals means you’re chemically bombing the system, okay?
It's chemical bombing.
When it's really drastic and it's necessary,
we must do it.
But if we do every day,
we know today what is the harm we’re causing to the system by doing that.
If you want to bring health to this nation,
you must bring back ancient systems,
yoga on all levels
On this International Yoga Day,
we are taking yoga to over 10,000 schools in India.
Manisha is saying that
she will take me to Nepal and (Laughs)
Manisha Koirala: I will
Sadhguru: In all the schools in Nepal (Laughs)
Manisha Koirala: It's my honor, Guruji (Applause).
Sadhguru: So because this has to come at an early age.
Your health should be your responsibility,
not your doctor’s responsibility, isn't it?
To stay healthy,
is it your business or somebody else’s business?
Government’s business to keep you healthy?
No,
it's my business to keep myself healthy.
How… What should I eat,
how should I live,
how should I sit,
how should I breathe,
what should I do with myself,
is something that I must be concerned about.
Prathap Reddy: It’s so wonderful Sadhguruji;
you know I know everyone in the beautiful auditorium here
and there’re thousands of people who are watching live on the internet,
they all want to know
if there a prescription for good health
spirituality, yoga meditation.
Because I have seen, you know,
some of the impossible things that you have done for other people when they were not well.
But more importantly when your health took bad,
no doctor and no medical dictionary or directory could ever detect it.
So is there something else to stay well?
I read in the book.
Arundhathi beautifully wrote in your biography,
she said you are a mystic, you know,
to have, have an undiagnosed illness for… and then got it cured.
Sadhguru: See
I hope you all have the same question on your health,
you want to stay healthy, right?
Participants: Yes.
Prathap Reddy: And I know everybody who is looking at us today
they want to know if Dr.Reddy never asked this question
I want their business, but I want them to stay well, Swami.
Sadhguru: The thing is
we created this body from inside.
So the manufacturer of this body is inside.
So if you have a repair job to be done,
would you like to go to the manufacturer or to the local mechanic?
If you had access, if you had access you would like to go to the manufacturer;
if you’ve lost access, you will go the local tinker to do this and that.
If there was no medical science as it is,
I would say even half the people would be dead by now,
here in this audience.
Yes,
because the average life expectancy of an Indian in 1947 was twenty eight years.
Today it has risen to sixty four,
one important factor is medical science the way it is.
So I am not trying to belittle or make fun of medical sciences.
It is very significant;
what has been achieved in the last thirty to forty years is phenomenal.
The question is just this
if you had access to the source of that which creates this body,
definitely every problem that you generate within the body could be handled.
Now there are two kinds of ailments
infectious and chronic.
Infectious ailments happen to us because of an external invasion
from an organism.
You must go to the doctor,
don’t try to meditate on it.
But seventy percent of the ailments on the planet are self created.
I am saying self created
because it happened from within you.
So what is happening from within you
can be very easily fixed from within you.
What comes to you from outside you need outside help for that.
So you have to fight an organism then you need medicine.
So the rest of the ailments, almost seventy percent are self created.
Why would your body work against you?
This body is essentially programmed for health.
Every cell in this body is programmed for health.
Why would it turn against to you?
Because somewhere you are not keeping it happy.
To put it in a very simple language
why would your own family turn against you?
Somewhere they’re not happy with you, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
They’re not happy with you, with something that you’re doing.
So similarly, some cells in the body,
some parts of your body are not happy with you for some reason.
You must pay little more attention.
There is a way, a systematic way of paying attention to this one,
because everything in this body was created from within.
When it is so,
can’t it fix from within?
So this is not a miracle.
I want people to understand. this is not a miracle.
What is a miracle is… Suppose you did not know what is electricity.
I came here and I just press that part of wall and lights come on,
who do you think I am?
Suppose, you know, a thousand years ago if I had a cell phone, tch,
I could just pull out the cell phone and talk to somebody in America,
you would think I am God, isn’t it?
So what is a miracle is,
that which you do not understand,
that which is not fitting into your your logical perception,
seems miraculous to you.
As your logic evolves,
so many things which were miracles hundred years ago
are normal things in our day to day life today, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
So it is not a miracle,
it’s just a deeper understanding of your… your… of your own,
the way you’re constructed.
So this is something that we need to pay attention to.
Questioner: So we’ve read about lot of yogis who travel across time,
in a fraction of second they have travelled
from India to china,
that’s where some of the
Sadhguru: But those times nobody was going to China.
Only now everybody is going to China.
Questioner: They can travel in a fraction of second.
Is that the travel just the travel… through mind or body?
Or if such a travel happens,
is it possible?
Sadhguru: Time travel, tch
There's no need to travel.
Time and space is an illusion created by your mind.
If you transcend that
there’s no here and there,
there is no now and then.
So if you are like that,
if there are willing recipients
See right now,
suppose we have a transmitter here
See right now it’s happening actually.
I am speaking here.
See no wires; these wires are not connected to me.
See! No wires.
I am speaking here;
it’s coming out all over the place.
Yes?
No wires.
Because it’s transmitting.
Because it’s transmitting
what I speak here is all over the place.
So your ability to transmit yourself,
to what extent you can,
simply depends on to what extent you are not.
Is it physical,
is it mental,
is it this,
is it that?
These are all divisions made by your mind.
Can you exactly divide where is your body and where is your mind?
We can talk in that context only for the sake of understanding,
not for the sake of perception,
not for the sake of experience.
You cannot experience your mind or your body
or anything else separately, isn’t it?
If you did not have a mind,
could you experience the body?
Hmm?
No.
So do you know where is your mind Donan now?
Do you know?
No.
So, it is just you.
Do you understand?
Rest is all made up.
‘You’ is good enough.
Don’t make up too many things.
Don’t make up too many things,
because you’re only confusing the whole issue.
Instead of simplifying the issue,
you’re confusing the issue,
you’re complicating the issue.
So
time
space,
these are all made up in your head.
Such things don't exist.
If you simply sit here, not being a victim of your mind,
what is here is there, what is there is here.
You didn't go anywhere,
everything was here, that's all.
Miss Jela [Thud] [Twang] Jeevanmukti, he means for [one] who is
unwavering in his intention
for him
liberation cannot be denied
the only reason
most of the humanity goes about
their life
blundering through their life
Not knowing which way to go is because they keep shifting that direction of their life, too often
they may not actually change the direction of their life, but
In their mind and emotion it keeps shifting and shifting and shifting and shifting
the very Nature of the existence
is such
Today it is also a scientific fact
But this is the experience of heavy yogi that in this existence
There is energy and this consciousness
There is no such thing as physical matter
Physical matter as you know today is just concentrated patterns of energy
Today, this is established science
But more than 40,000 years ago when she was spoke. He spoke clearly
His involvement was in absolute consciousness or in the energy
never in the physical matter because he did not see it as real and
He spoke Thus
Very clearly without any ambiguity about it
So these are the only two things
One needs to deal with oh
Why didn't you tell us we would have done the surya namaskar today morning?
You're not doing this surya namaskar to build muscle
If you have to know the energy
right now it's
Concentrated in the form of this body only if you use it in a certain way, it'll crackle
Otherwise it'll sit like a lump of Earth
if this has to sit here and crackle then it has to be kept in a certain way, so
whatever the physical Sadhana that you're doing is not to build muscle
not to
That when you go home, you can dominate the people at home
I'm telling the ladies
You could be stronger than them
90 days of Sadhana, you could be actually stronger than
If your energies can crackle and your mind is focused
then
This will just build in that direction
Because the mind is shifting and shifting and shifting focus it does not know which way to build
The very life within you is confused. It doesn't know which way to go
I would say
more than
95
Actually, I think it's 99, but so that I'm not wrong
at least
95 percent of the Human Energy
He's wasted. We simply wasted because
most human beings cannot hold anything in their focus
For any substantial amount of time
Otherwise each of them would be opening up on your window [a] new door to something else
Seven billion people if they had all had their minds and consciousness focused
everything
Just everything have to yield
nothing would be
Unexplored just everything
If one
keeps his
mind
His energies and his consciousness organized in One direction for a certain period Of time
He not only realizes the nature of this life
the Past Eighty-four
Creations that have happened. They are also here everything could be explored by human consciousness
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: This is an often asked question;
it’s not about this party or that,
that ethical politics is not sustainable in India.
That what we all desire or we claim to desire
is not winnable in India is a prevailed proposition,
I can now say with some degree of confidence across the country.
The challenge is how to reserve that.
That’s the anguish of that young man,
Sadhguru, you already mentioned the answer,
you gave the answer earlier.
We all forget the initial conditions of our democracy
because we take the normative democratic institutions and the constitution.
We think it should operate the way it operates in other countries,
after certain degree of maturity.
We have not created the initial conditions and
Sadhguru is repeatedly emphasizing that.
Even today the voters have no notion
that they’re electing a representative.
They think they’re electing a monarch.
And once elected he somehow will deliver, we don’t care how.
No rules, no laws, no procedure,
get it done somehow or other.
And that’s not merely the failing of the poor people,
it is the failing of our class, Sadhguru.
It is the failing of the middle classes,
it’s the failing of the educated.
That’s the general perception.
The second is,.
Sadhguru, I agree with the broader point that all of us are political.
Politics is not a dirty thing and
I’m glad you’re making that point as a spiritual leader.
Unless we recognize that we’re all in politics,
you like it or not, in some form or the other,
doesn’t mean you contest, doesn’t mean you’re a member of a political party,
doesn’t mean you aspire for power,
but actually aspire change
Sadhguru: you must aspire for power
because if you don’t aspire for power,
I understand that you have no intention of doing anything for this country.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: Oh, that I agree.
That’s even more music to my ears.
But I’m now I’m trying to
Sadhguru: No, because
why I’m speaking like this is, in Indian minds,
particularly middle class minds, people who can read newspapers and watch televisions,
in these people minds,
business is a bad word,
power is a bad word.
No, these are not bad words.
These have gotten into bad hands, that is the problem.
These are good things. (Applause)
Sadhguru: A very beautiful incident happened
in Ramayan.
Rama
too many unfortunate happenings in his life. Hmm?
He is a king.
For some reason, he loses his kingdom
or he gives up his kingdom,
or whichever way,
or he’s conned out of his kingdom,
or he’s too gentle to protest
and walks away from it into the jungle,
lives a hard life.
Then
his wife gets kidnapped by Ravan,
And then,
having love for his wife and being despondent
about the loss of her
and being concerned what could be happening to her,
he walks all the way down south,
gathers an army of Tamil people
Yeah,
who else was in Tamil Nadu?
And gets across to Sri Lanka,
wages a war,
defeats Ravan in the battle,
slays him.
As all of you know,
Ravan had ten heads.
With one, you’re struggling, hmm?
He had ten!
So Rama went about,
you know,
ten slaughters
so that the man is dead.
Battle won,
they’re coming back to Ayodhya.
Rama chooses
He says,
“I don’t want to go back to the kingdom.
I want to go to Himalayas
and spend some time in the cave of Agastya Muni
because I want to repent
for the great sin that I have committed.
I have killed someone,
who was pious,
a great devotee of Shiva,
a phenomenal scholar,
a great king,
a generous man.”
The others were shocked.
Lakshmana, his brother, said,
“What are you talking about?
Ravana kidnapped your wife.”
So Rama said,
“See, those are the other nine heads.
In these other nine heads of his,
he had greed,
jealousy,
lust,
all kinds of things.
But there was one head,
which had great wisdom,
knowledge,
piety,
devotion.
I regret taking that head.
I would have liked to leave that head alone,
not kill the man.
But there was no way to do it,
so I had to do this.
But I am in great repentance
because I took away that one head.”
What this is trying to tell you is,
all of you have ten or more heads –
all kinds of things.
Do you see?
One day your head is in greed,
another ray… another day in jealousy,
another day in hatred,
another day in love,
another day in beauty,
another day in ugliness.
Yes or no?
Or the same day you go through everything
If I see you in a moment of jealousy, I’ll say,
“This is a jealous one.”
If I see you in a moment of greed, I say,
“This is a greedy one.”
If I see you in a moment of hatred, I say,
“That is a hateful one.”
If I see you in a moment of lust,
I say, “That’s a lustful one.”
No, no, everybody has ten and more heads.
At different times,
different heads are working.
But everybody has head –
at least one head –
of love,
beauty,
generosity,
compassion.
At least one head,
there is.
So the biggest mistake you do in your life is
that instead of identifying
and condemning a quality,
you condemn an individual person.
This is what Rama is trying to say.
“It doesn’t matter,
he did so many horrible things,
those are the other nine heads.
But that one head I saw of tremendous possibility
but unfortunately, I had to take that.”
I want all of you
to follow this fundamental principle –
in the ashram and wherever else you may be –
that if you see something wrong in somebody,
we will only condemn that,
not him or her.
If you bring this wisdom in this New Year,
if you just bring this wisdom,
this Bhogi,
all the baggage will go.
When you do this to others,
the same will happen to you.
There is no need to conclude,
“I am this way, I am that way,
or I’m like this only.”
Well, that’s how you have been in some moments.
In some moments,
you’ve been a horrible creature,
in some moments, you’ve been beautiful,
in some moments, you’ve been ugly,
in some moments, you’ve been wonderful.
If you don’t empower the possibility
and take away
that which blocks your possibility,
then you’re not a spiritual seeker.
You are a,
you know
We must make you a kangaroo court judge
“She’s not okay,
she’s not okay, he’s not okay,
he’s not okay,
he’s not okay, not okay.
And there are a few new people here,
whom we’re yet to know
they are beautiful,” you know?
That is a judgmental life.
Otherwise,
the more you get to know somebody,
more love and compassion should happen because
now you know all their struggles and problems and things
and suddenly you know
they’re bloody as human as you are
yes?
Rama is doing penance for having killed a man,
who kidnaps his wife
and he’s done many terrible things.
But Rama is still identifying,
“There was one head, which was so beautiful.
I shouldn’t have removed that.”
This is a man of great wisdom.
This is why he is worshipped.
Every sensible human being
like this
if you see a rose plant, we call it a rose plants.
Tell me, are there more roses or more thorns?
More thorns but we call it a rose plant
because we recognize the beauty.
Maybe only one rose but 1000 thorns
but we still call it a rose plant.
If you see a mango tree,
there’re more mangoes or more leaves?
Definitely more leaves.
We don’t call it a leaf tree,
we call it a mango tree
because we recognize the sweetness that it drops.
Those drops of sweetness
Full of leaf but that one mango –
“Wow, mango tree!”
Why don’t we see this in people?
Hmm?
If there is one drop of sweetness
Have you seen any human being without a single drop of sweetness?
Have you seen?
Then please do this.
Before Pongal or Maattu Pongal comes,
depending on which category you are
please everybody around you,
the people that you work with on a daily basis,
people with whom you’ve been rubbing –
no, not rubbing shoulders
you know.
Just do this –
the people that you
That horrible person,
this terrible woman –
just see that one drop of sweetness
can you recognize because
if you cannot recognize that,
it will not reflect in you,
you better know that.
Terrible things that you see in other people will reflect in you.
This does not mean you should become blind to everything.
No.
We see the leaf in the tree,
we see the thorns in the rose bush,
but we acknowledge the flower and the fruit.
That’s all we need to do.
Rama’s birthday is also coming in the couple of months.
Let’s make this happen.
Manisha Koirala: So,
what do we do
to keep calm inside, Guruji (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: See, there is no clamor inside,
it's calm.
It is just that
you do not know what is inside,
what is outside.
Whatever happens outside,
in compulsive reaction,
inside also it happens.
What is happening inside is only a reflection,
right?
Whatever is happening outside,
the reflection is happening inside.
Now, if you
if
if I hold a mirror to you,
the mirror shows a beautiful face.
If I hold it to myself,
it shows an ugly face, what to do (Laughter)?
What to do?
That’s how it is.
But your face will not stick to the mirror, isn't it?
So, now I want to look beautiful,
so I will show the mirror to you first
and then keep the mirror in my home
I’m not going to look beautiful.
Yes?
So nothing stuck to the mirror.
That is the importance and significance of the mirror.
It is supposed to show you things
just the way it is.
when you ask a painter to paint your picture,
you ask him to do little this and this
and make yourself little more beautiful, everything.
That’s okay
because after we are gone,
they see us really beautiful (Both laugh).
But in the mirror,
you stand in front of the mirror
because you want to see it the way it is.
Yes or no?
Manisha Koirala: Yes.
Sadhguru: That’s the idea of standing in front of the mirror.
I know we have hearld… heard stories of,
“Who is the prettiest of all in front of the mirror?”
all that stuff.
But the essence of standing in front of the mirror
is to see reality as it is,
not to see a pretty picture.
That is the nature of your mind too.
This is not about painting a pretty picture.
This is about simply seeing things the way they are.
If you learn to see things just the way they are,
you will know how to navigate.
If you see things the way you want it,
then you will not be able to navigate
because you’re not in reality first of all (Laughs).
Manisha Koirala: Guruji,
it is exceptionally difficult to see things as they are
because our egos always want to see us as pretty and beautiful.
Sadhguru: (Overlapping conversation) I will tell you why it’s difficult.
No, no, no.
Where is your e… You
You show me
You show me where is your ego, I’ll fix it right away (Laughter).
Where is it?
Manisha Koirala: In the mind?
Sadhguru: Where in the mind, tell me?
Manisha Koirala: Not in the brain,
but in the mind.
In the idea of ego
Sadhguru: No, you’re saying something like this (Gestures).
Where is it (Laughter)?
Manisha Koirala: So
Sadhguru: So the thing is just this –
sometimes, Manisha is very beautiful,
a wonderful person,
then you say, “I’m a wonderful person.”
Sometimes, she is nasty,
then you turn back and say,
“Oh, that was my ego,”
okay (Both laugh)?
So Miss Ego is a fall guy (Laughs).
Whenever you’re nasty,
Miss Ego will come,
whenever you’re wonderful,
only you are there (Laughter).
Manisha Koirala: So we are not owning our bad side.
Sadhguru: So (Laughs)… We… We must settle this.
Are
Is there only one person in this body or two?
Manisha Koirala: Multiple persons (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Oh, this is schizophrenia (Laughter/Applause).
If there is more than one in your
here within you,
either you’re schizophrenic
or you’re possessed (Laughter).
That means either a psychiatrist
or an exorcist (Laughter/Applause).
What it means is,
when you say, “I am an individual,”
we must understand the root word for individual is
indivisible.
Manisha Koirala: Indivisible.
Sadhguru: Yes,
that means this (Referring to oneself) cannot be further divided.
Only if you come to this,
that this (Referring to oneself) is an individual,
then you will understand
the fundamental, “
If I’m wonderful, it's me;
if I’m nasty, it's me;
if I’m beautiful, it's me;
if I’m ugly, it's me.”
If you come to terms with this,
your life will be a constant step forward
to become better and better.
“Whenever I’m wonderful, it's me;
when I’m nasty, it's you” –
well, it’ll stay that way forever and it’ll grow (Laughs).
Manisha Koirala: So, Guruji –
I’ll just take this little more –
does it… that means that
when we see in the mirror an ugly side,
which I was saying as the ego,
we should be able to accept that?
Is that what you’re saying?
Sadhguru: No,
I’m saying,
what you call as a human being is not an established thing.
It is a becoming (Laughs).
It's not really
We must call this (Referring to oneself) “human becoming” (Laughs).
You have to become one
because in the evolutionary scale of things
You know Charles Darwin?
Manisha Koirala: Yes.
Sadhguru: He told you,
“At one time, you were a monkey” –
him, not me, okay (Laughter).
He told you,
“At one time, you were a monkey
and then you became a human being”
and all this stuff.
So he goes about saying,
a goat became a giraffe
and it took so many millions years –
could have become.
Or a pig could have become an elephant,
it took so many more million years.
But between a monkey and a human being,
it happened rather quickly (Laughs).
It didn’t take enough time, I’m saying (Laughter),
to
to such a point that
anthropologists today believe
that there is a missing link (Laughter).
They believe there’s a missing link
because it happened so quickly.
See, between the DNA of a chimpanzee
and the human beings that we are,
the DNA difference is only 1.23 percent.
Not much of a difference, isn't it (Laughter/Applause)?
So physiologically
physiologically,
we are not very far away from a chimpanzee.
But intellectually,
cerebral capabilities
and in terms of our awareness and consciousness,
we are worlds apart.
Or in other words, you have an intelligence
for which you don’t have a stable enough foundation.
So the entire yogic system
is just to create a stable foundation.
A stable foundation means –
any foundation
or any building,
if it has to stand for a long time
and in a stable manner,
it must be geometrically correct.
So entire yogic system is about
aligning your physical geometry to the cosmic geometry,
so that you have a stable enough platform
upon which this intelligence can blossom.
When I say stable enough platform,
today people
Wherever you go,
people talk about
tension,
anxiety,
rage on the road,
all kinds of nonsense.
You can call it by many names
but essentially, what’s happening is
your own intelligence has turned against you.
That’s all that’s happened.
Why is your intelligence turning against you?
Because you don’t have a stable enough platform to handle it.
See, if somebody comes and tries to hurt you physically,
you have some defense.
Suppose your own hands started beating you up,
how to stop this?
Only somebody else has to stop it (Laughter), isn't it?
So right now,
your
If you sit
See, if you are going through some kind of suffering
because I am causing the suffering to you right now,
I’m poking you and you’re suffering, it's different.
But look at most human beings –
when they’re alone, they can suffer.
If you are suffering when you are alone,
obviously you are in bad company, isn't it (Both laugh)?
So your own intelligence has turned against you.
Your body,
your mind,
your energies must work for you.
What have you done about that?
If you don’t do anything about it,
your own hands will start punching you.
There’s no solution for this from outside,
unless we either handcuff you
or amputate you.
That’s what they’re trying to do today.
In some ways,
what do you think all these drugs are?
They’re trying to amputate you in some way,
mentally
put you down (Laughs).
(Questioner): Good evening sir, I had a question.
From what I understood about self-enhancing that you spoke about,
I felt that there might be a need of a guide,
so is there such a necessity,
and if yes
how important is the role of a guide?
(Sadhguru): How important
(Questioner): is the role of a guide in self-enhancing?
(Sadhguru): Role of a
(Questioner): Guide
(Sadhguru): See, when I talk about the inner dimension,
it is not a difficult place to get,
but it is an uncharted terrain,
it's not a place where you have traveled.
So if you're traveling in a space that you're not used to,
it is definitely sensible to walk with a guide.
'Can I not do it myself?'
You can;
not that you cannot,
you definitely can,
it is just that to find that block which is right next to this hall
you may go around the world and come back and may find it.
If you talk to somebody who has walked the campus,
he will say 'It's right here,'
isn't it?
If you don't ask and you want to find it yourself,
you may go around the world three times and still miss it;
for that sake you need a guide.
It is,... it is always this question is coming up as if
did you learn ABC with somebody's guidance?
Hmm?
Did you learn how to write 'A' with somebody's guidance?
Yes. '
B' also?
Yes.
(Laughter)
When that is the case, I don't see, what is the problem?
It is a huge problem everywhere,
'Can't I do it myself?'
Well, did you even learn 'A' by yourself?
You learned with somebody's help, isn't it?
What is your problem when it comes to exploring an inner dimension
of such great significance to you,
is it not important that you go with somebody
who has already walked the path?
Is it not much simpler and sensible?
If there is no guide anywhere, of course you have to do it yourself,
but it may take a lifetime.
If I give you... You're an engineer right now,
but still if I open my watch and put it into... mix it up and give it to you,
the next three, four years of your engineering you may be still fixing this watch.
Yes, I'm telling you, if we don't give you a manual, nothing,
I will just take away this watch into pieces and give it to you,
you may spend three years just to put it back.
A watch is not a new thing on this planet,
isn't it?
It is not a new thing in this world
but still you may take three years to put it together.
So if you had a guide book, how to put it together,
you may do it in ten minutes, isn't it?
So that's why a guide
definitely needed I would say,
otherwise it'll take unnecessarily length of time.
Impractical lengths of time it will take,
which is not necessary,
because life is after all a brief amount of time.

Devi Shetty: Sadhguru the
by the great work done by
all the senior cardiac surgeons,
cardiologists and all the good doctors of this country,
heart care has attained lot of
it has got lot of confidence from the people.
It’s very interesting Sadhguru,
when I started my career twenty-five years ago,
I left England twenty-five years ago,
I started in Calcutta.
If I told a patient then
Sadhguru: Lot of heart break there (Devi Shetty laughs).
Devi Shetty: …if I told the patient then
that he needed an operation,
it required more than an hour of convincing him
for an operation
but today I face a different problem
Sadhguru: They are standing in a line (Few Laugh).
Devi Shetty: Today Sadhguru when I tell a patient
after seeing all the reports,
that you do not need an operation,
I have to spend one hour to convince him,
why he doesn’t need operation (Laughter/Applause).
Everyone wants heart operation Sadhguru (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Is it for romantic reasons or… (Laughter/Applause).
Devi Shetty: How do we
how do we convince people
that fixing the heart is not like, you know
if something wrong with your house you get a plumber,
he will fix it or you know
if something wrong with the car you change the parts
it is something different.
There are… th… the
we are not the magicians or we are not the gods
and the nature is the best healer
and cardiac surgery is only a fifty year old phenomena,
people have lived for centuries...
Sadhguru: I think they have also realized it’s a dumb part (Laughter).
Devi Shetty: It’s a big dilemma for all of us Sadhguru.
Today people want something to be done on their body all the time.
Sadhguru: Yes (Few Laugh).
If not heart, many other parts (Laughter).
Yes as I said probably in other fifty years,
fifty percent of the population will be going through these surgeries,
which is not health,
which is medical industry but not health.
If health has to happen,
a culture of health has to come in.
Not health care systems,
not hospitals,
not more doctors,
not more surgeries
but a culture of health has to evolve.
Right now
world is in a way of imitating everything that America does.
They eat badly,
they live badly
and they have a three trillion dollar bill of health care,
it’s sinking the country.
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: Okay, it’s sinking the whole nation
health care.
We want to follow the same things,
we want to dress like them,
we want to eat like them,
we want to live like them
and we want to get unhealthy like them
but our country cannot spend three million
three trillion dollars on you for sure.
We will let you die (Laughter).
Yes,
we’re not going to reach out to everybody and do surgery for 1.25 billion people.
That’s not going to happen in near future
and if it doesn’t happen it’s a disaster,
if it happens it’s a bigger disaster.
That people do not know
how to live well is a disastrous way.
That
I would say seventy percent of the ailments on this planet
can be just handled with better sense of living,
eating,
atmosphere, if you manage,
seventy percent will be gone.
You can achieve this in twelve to fifteen years of time on the planet,
if a determined effort is made by the people,
by the policy
and by everybody concerned,
particularly the hospitals.
They can do a lot because when they are sick they listen you know, (Laughter)
otherwise they don’t (Sadhguru Laughs) yeah?
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: When they are well they don’t listen,
when they are sick they will listen, their
they have ears… more ears than two when they are sick.
That’s the time to talk to them as to how to live better.
These things are not new to us,
these are very strongly rooted in our cultural milieu.
But we’re throwing it away for something which will bring us lot of trouble.
For immediate attention,
for immediate intervention
of course medical intervention is primary
and it’s most vital there’s no question about that.
But long term health will not happen because of medical sciences as we know it.
Long term health of a society or a nation or the planet
will not happen that way
we have to bring a culture of health.
What is the way to live,
what is the way to eat,
how to keep our body,
how to keep our mind,
how to keep our breath,
how to keep the atmosphere around us,
if this culture is not brought into us from our childhood
I would say it must be brought into the school curriculum itself.
It must be brought in
healthful ways of living
because if you do not build healthy people,
you’re going to have educated and sick people
and you’re going to build a nation or a world out of it.
With sick people you are not going to build a great nation,
you can only build a sick nation.
And that is happening across the world,
the major nations are suffering enormous amount of illnesses.
The most affluent countries
who have no nutritional problems, okay
India’s half the problem are nutritional problems,
right from their childhood they have not eaten properly
affluent nations who have a choice of nourishment
look at the level of… a
health issues they have.
That should not exist at all
when they have choice of nourishment
they should not have
I would say eighty percent of the people should not have any health issues till they die.
One twenty percent, twenty-five percent will get something,
infections will come because of close proximity
those are different
but these are all on self-help.
People are on self-help to create ailments for themselves.
This can be one hundred percent taken away
if we establish a culture of health
for which I think not just medical professionals,
people from various other areas have to work together to make this happen.
I don’t see any major synergy like that right now,
small efforts are happening here and there
but that’s not enough.
It’s good but it’s not enough.
(Sadhguru): You have no duty in this world;
you can do whatever you want.
Only thing is whatever you do, there is consequence.
Whatever the consequence if you are willing to joyfully take the consequence,
do whatever you want.
But if the consequence is unpleasant, you are going to cry,
if you are that kind, control the action.
It's as simple as that.
So is it right, wrong?
That’s not the thing.
Every action will produce a certain kind of consequence in our lives.
If you can handle any kind of consequence joyfully,
do whatever you please,
but when things go wrong
or when things become unpleasant,
you are going to suffer,
if that is your case then you must,
you know, regulate the activity that you perform.
So when would duty come in?
If you do something for your child it's a joy.
If you do something for the child on the street, it's your duty that you’re fulfilling.
When… when heart is barren,
when your heart is bereft of love,
then only you can perform duty.
There is no need to do any duty in this world
because the duty will bring boredom to everybody and burdensomeness to you.
If you are in an inclusive state of experience,
every opportunity you get to do something is wonderful for you.
To the limits you will do whatever you can do.
Is it your duty?
It is not your duty,
it is your life
because right now these flowers
are they all looking pretty and performing their duty for you?
I am asking.
You think they are all performing duty,
because they are all pretty and looking at you?
Sometime ago I just wrote one four-line poem.
Let me tell you.
I saw a flower
Thought it was giving
On closer look realized
It's just living.
Everything in the existence
you are supposed to become full-fledged life.
If you become a full-fledged life,
everything that you do will be useful for everybody around you
and everything around you.
Instead of becoming a full-fledged life
you are trying to pretend with duty,
with morality, with ethic and all kinds of things.
You’re trying to imitate life,
you are trying to imitate a good life;
it's not going to work.
Sadhguru: What being on the path of the Divine means is that
you don’t have your own nonsense anymore.
Where does your nonsense come from?
A bit from your parents,
a bit from the society in which you live,
rest you cook it up. (Laughs)
Yes?
Yes or no?
Bit from your genetics,
a bit from the external impressions;
using these two things you cook up the rest.
What comes from external situations is
all too much fragmented - bits and pieces.
Maybe this information is useful for your survival
it is!
What comes from your genes
You know Charles Darwin told you were a monkey.
So if you say, ‘My genetics decide who I am,’
the monkey business
the monkey business will not end ever,
’cause even now, your DNA is only 1.23 percent different
from that of a chimpanzee.
Your evolution is only that much. (Laughs)
So, the more you depend on your genetics,
the more of a monkey you become.
I say a monkey because if you go by your genetics
you become cyclical.
If you travel like this (Moves his finger to make a circle),
one moment if you’re not alert
you will go off at a tangent.
If you go like this (Stretching his arm straight, denoting a straight path),
you may slow down,
you may hasten,
you don’t go anywhere.
So being on the path of Divine means,
first thing to become free from your genetics.
It is in this context,
we say Shiva is swayambhu -
that means he has no parentage.
He dropped it.
He cleaned his mother and father out of him.
No father, no mother, just him,
because genetics means repetition.
Repetition means cyclical nature,
cyclical nature means you’re going in circles,
you’re not going anywhere.
So this ‘I’ business and all
you’re reading bits and pieces of Vedanta.
Please stop that.
Don’t read all this stuff
me and my consciousness and my witness
and where is the witness
witnessing the witness? …witness… witness… witness… witness… witness
you can go on endlessly.
Witness witnesses the witness,
and witness witnesses witness witness, witness, witnesses witness witness witness.
This is just a mental game.
Ignorant people acting like they know,
this is what happens.
Philosophies will flourish.
Philosophies
The more philosophical a society is
or the more philosophical a human being is,
the more he is clearly declaring to the world
that he is a pretender
what he does not know, he acts like he knows.
Simple practical people they know they don’t know,
and they’re proud that they don’t know.
That’s the problem,
but at least they know that they do not know.
So do not get into this trap of intellectualizing the Existence.
Very confidently you use this word ‘Existence’,
but do you know what is Existence?
Does anybody know what is Existence?
Does anybody know?
Nobody knows.
So when we talk
when you use words of the
of whose meaning we do not know,
that’s called rubbish, isn't it?
But, maybe socially very valuable rubbish
because it confuses somebody.
If you can confuse a few people,
they may believe you’re intelligent.
Really!
If you want to be perceived as intellectual,
you just have to confuse a few people.
You don’t have to bring clarity to anybody.
The work
The spirituality or the spiritual work is about bringing clarity,
not confusion.
Confusion we do only when people have deep conclusions.
When people have conclusions in their mind
which they believe is everything,
then we confuse them a bit
so that their conclusions get loosened up.
Once Shankaran Pillai won the Meghalaya state lottery.
Is that still on?
Is it still or gone?
Tch.
No lottery?
Okay at that time,
1984
We change the date, what’s the problem?
After all we made up the dates,
we can use it the way we want it, isn't it? (Laughs)
Not now,
1984 he won a lottery
and people gathered,
press gathered and everybody said,
‘Wow, you won a lottery!
Fifty six crores!’
You heard those days, isn't it? ‘
So, how did you get this lucky number?’
So Shankaran Pillai said,
‘I had… Three consecutive nights I had a dream.
In the dream it said,
‘Number eight, number eight, number eight three times.’
Three times it appeared
eight, eight eight.
Then I thought (Snapping his fingers)
three times eight is thirty two
and I went for the thirty-two ticket and I got it!’
Then people said,
‘Well, three times eight is not thirty-two,
it is twenty-four.’ (Laughter)
He said, ‘What does it matter, I won the lottery!’ (Laughter/Applause)
So I’m telling you,
Existence does not fit into your logic.
It’s not logically correct.
It’s not logically correct,
but it’s fantastic.
That means what’s wrong?
That means what’s wrong?
That means your logic is too limited, isn't it?
‘No, Existence is not correct,
why is it not fitting into my logic?’
This is the argument of a madman, isn't it?
This is the way it is.
If your logic doesn’t fit into it
there’s a problem with your head,
not with the Existence.
Sadhguru: This would have been the argument about ten years ago
that people would say, “Water is water.
How can one water be different from another?
If water is cleaned of impurities,
all water is same.”
This would have been the argument ten years ago but not anymore.
Modern science is clearly saying that
depending upon what the water has been in touch with,
accordingly it behaves differently.
This is an established fact now
because water has memory.
Now when we say gangajal,
why it’s been important is
it is flowing through certain lands,
it is flowing through certain terrain,
which has a certain impact.
And it is not for one or two generations,
for hundreds of generations people have been doing spiritual sadhana,
they’ve been in touch with this water.
The quality of that is there in the water.
Sundarlal Bahuguna went about proving this to people and he died for it,
nothing much happened unfortunately.
But his own health got transformed tremendously just living on the Ganga bank.
Now, is this just emotion?
No.
But at the same time,
is the water what it used to be before in Ganga?
No,
because the water that you’re drinking today is held in a dam in two-three different places
and one dam which holds it there for a long period of time and then let out.
It is not the same thing anymore unfortunately.
This is one thing we should have not done.
If we want electricity, there are so many others ways to do it.
This is one thing we should have not done
because Ganga had a special quality.
Now we put a dam across this in Himalayas,
which is absolutely unnecessary,
just for little bit of electricity.
Anyway, the amount of sediment that comes in Himalayas,
all these dams will be filled with sediment in no time, believe me.
In another twenty-five years,
these dams will be useless unless some major dredging activity has to happen
and where will you put that.
There’ll be… None of the dams we’ve been able to dredge successfully.
Dams across Mahanadi, Hirakud, everything is totally loaded up,
it’s useless and… now,
simply because the amount of sediment.
The amount of sediment that is coming in the Himalayan region is probably
twenty-five times to fifty times higher than in a normal river,
simply because of the terrain and the nature of the terrain.
So, I think it was
it was a sacrilege that we put a dam on Ganga for electricity.
We could have generated it in so many different ways.
Well, it is the necessity of the people,
on the plains we do it.
But that one river, which is the consciousness of this country,
we could have left it alone.
But most of the water that’s coming in Ganga river today flows through tunnels,
it’s going through turbines and then coming.
So, I cannot assure you that it’s the same quality now
but still, whether you believe or you don’t believe,
if you touch the water, you will see it’s very different.
Because – I’ve trekked in Himalayas for twenty-seven years,
continuously twenty-seven years I trekked,
every year I went back.
Many times I have seen –
just a glass of water I drink, I don’t have to eat anything,
whole day I’m walking.
With just one glass of water, you drink a stomach-full of water,
it just keeps you going, that won’t happen anywhere else.
If you go to the upper regions,
if you go towards Go
you know, Gomukh and those areas,
the water is definitely special.
As it comes down, with all these turbines and stuff,
it’s not the same but still it is different from what you would find elsewhere.
So, this is not an emotional aspect,
there is a scientific basis to it.
Unfortunately we are not maintaining that atmosphere.
We are destroying the atmosphere
and expect the water to be same,
it won’t be after some time.
Sadhguru: The life within you always wants to be alive,
always longing to hit the highest peak possible.
Life is always exuberant and effervescent.
It is only psychologically,
you have hit a depressive mode.
You got lost in the logical dimension of your mind.
Your intelligence says one thing
but the logical thinking says something else altogether.
The repetitive nature of your daily life can itself be depressive.
I want you to understand this –
moments of extreme logic are moments of suicide.
Depression means you’re committing suicide in installments.
More and more you apply your logic to your life,
the less and less alive you become.
Your logic should be employed
only to handle the material aspects of your life.
If you apply logic to your life itself,
you will become depressed.
If you eliminate everything that means something to you –
the birds in the sky,
the flowers in your garden,
your child’s face –
and dissect your life with your logic,
depression will be the destination.
It is time you rejig your life.
The most valuable thing in your life is life itself.
Where you live,
what you drive,
what you wear,
what you eat –
these are all accessories to life.
You’re alive right now.
this is the biggest phenomenon
This is the greatest joy
You need to clearly understand,
it doesn’t pay to be unhappy,
depressed or sick.
Being joyful and ecstatic pays
and if it doesn’t pay, who cares (Laughs)?
once the human being becomes more and more aware of his own nature
he understands to experience love
to experience blissfulness
to experience ecstasy
even to experience orgasmic ways of life
you don't need anybody actually
First thing is there is no trick
The problem is in the transmission
The way it is transmitted; if I give you a flower
It is a life full of life
You will have to care for it in a certain way
When I find you don't know how to hold a flower there are people like this. I give them a flower
They will grab it like this
Those who don't know what it is. They will grab it like this flower will die right there in their hands
So then what to do? Then we will give you a plastic flower.
now...
You have a piece of plastic which you think is flower, so this is what is happening to yoga.
without the subjectivity
Just the instructions are going
So you have a Stillbirth?
Isn't it better not to get pregnant than to have a Stillbirth?
So fitness is what you're looking for please go swim in the yellow river
Play Tennis
climb a mountain
Do something
for Fitness
yoga
Definitely gives you fitness, not just physical fitness it gives you fitness and all levels
But that is not the reason why you practice it.
You
practice yoga
Because you want to become one with everything
So in the transmission there must be subjectivity
Right now we have become slaves of objectivity.
because
We are not using any other form of intelligence within us except the intellect. If you use only the intellect
It true that intellect is useful only if you chop like a knife
You want to dull intellect or a sharp intellect?
Sharp, so it's a knife now. You use the knife to stitch
You'll only tear it further
Knife is not an appropriate instrument to stitch if you want to stitch you need something else
But now you're using a knife to stitch. It's not going to work, so
yoga
Unfortunately is going through this phase around the world that only
the Physical aspect,
A Stillborn child is being delivered. It still looks like a baby of course
But if not alive, it's not going to grow if you have a plastic flower. It's not going to blossom. Isn't it?
So this is not going to blossom. Maybe you will get abs if you stretch and turn enough
but you are strengthening the wall instead of opening up the wall. How it is transmitted is vital but
How you receive it is also important. How you practice it is also important
Without bringing those dimensions into the process if you just bring a bunch of instructions
Then it becomes a very objectified yoga with this you may get physical fitness, but that is like
using an airplane like a bullock cart
you
Devi Shetty: There are
large number of Indian or western techniques of healing,
which may not have scientific data, but they work.
And I have a personal experience.
Many years ago,
my wife developed lower backache.
It was intense pain, excruciating pain.
As usual I took her to a neurologist,
they did MRI and everything is fine, there is no problem.
But poor thing she was really
Sadhguru: I’m glad you were not a spinal surgeon,
otherwise you would have done it (Few Laugh).
Devi Shetty: Then my brother-in-law suggested that
I should take her to see a acupuncture specialist.
As a doctor
you know it was a bit embarrassing for me to go to somebody
And he didn’t have a fancy clinic,
I went to his house.
And he talked to my wife for few minutes
and he made her sleep flat on the floor
and Sadhguru he took… you know
from the …the… the heel he started pressing on her lower back for ten minutes
as I was watching.
I am not exaggerating,
she never had the lower back pain ever since.
Sadhguru: I’ll show you thousands and thousands like that,
not even… not even with any needles, simply
Devi Shetty: I was so fascinated, because
he cured my wife
and he did something which I couldn’t do it for thirty-two years,
she was fine.
There are many ways of treating people
and as professionals we have to respect all the ways of treating.
Sadhguru: Definitely.
I would say allopathic system is at its best, when there is an emergency.
When there is time,
definitely other systems are way better
if you ask me, in many ways.
Particularly this is something hardly known to people,
in southern most part of India,
largely in Tamil Nadu we have what is called as Siddha
Siddha Vaidya.
It’s a most incredible medical system.
So comprehensive,
there are over three hundred thousand formulations.
I don’t think even modern pharmacopeia has that,
over three hundred thousand formulations
elaborately written down.
And the fundamental difference between Ayurveda and Siddha is
Ayurveda is herb based,
Siddha is elemental.
The only thing is the skill level that it demands from the doctor
is a challenge in modern world.
This is something that you have to live,
then only it works.
The person who administers it is as important at what is administered.
who administers it
you are talking about touch
so who administers it is important,
not just what is administered.
But the nature of modern medicine is,
you write a prescription
some chemist who knows nothing about it gives it,
and they take it.
It’s only purely chemical and it works.
But when there are chronic ailments,
if there is infection, killing it with whatever you know
chemical bombing it, is the way to do it.
But when you are generating an illness from within,
correcting it from within is most important.
If there is an emergency,
you have to intervene more aggressively,
that’s different.
But these systems have such a comprehensive knowledge about
health and well-being.
But the problem is
it needs a lifelong involvement and dedication
to become something good with this kind of system.
It is not something that you can acquire as a profession and do it.
Always it was seen as a sacred duty that you can actually
see I want everybody to think about its
and I’m sure many times you are facing this within yourself.
It’s not
it is not a prescription,
it is not a surgery,
it is not something.
It is a person’s life,
whether he lives or dies.
I mean,
your existence
it’s… it’s not a… it is not a case,
it is not a statistic.
For that person it is the only life that he has.
This needs far more deeper attention
than just being handled as a profession,
I think that sense of dedication and involvement
individual doctors might have grown into it,
but still that’s not there as a culture,
that is not there
it should not be seen as a profession,
that’s what I’m saying.
Yes, of course monetary requirements are there,
that will happen,
that’s a different thing.
But first of all it must be seen as a certain commitment
and a certain privilege
that you are able to either end or extend somebody’s life
is not a small privilege
Questioner: What are the best practices for someone who is dead serious? (Laughter)
Sadhguru: Dead or serious? (Laughter)
Questioner: Well, you referred to this last night.
Sadhguru: Yeah.
It once happened...
There was a Sufi master in Basra.
You know Basra?
Basra is a
that place which is famous for pearls today in Iraq
or it's famous for bombing, whichever way.
So someone came and said,
‘Please give me a teaching.’
He refused,
‘No teaching.’
Then more and more important people started coming to him
and said, ‘Please give us a teaching.’
He said, ‘No teaching.’
Now because he refuses to teach, he became very famous.
So one day a great scholar in the area
who is well-versed in all the scriptures and everything,
he came and insisted,
‘You have to teach;
you have something that no scholar can have.
I am beginning to realize that.
So you have to teach; you cannot keep it to yourself.’
So the Sufi master looked at him and said,
‘I am not giving a teaching to you,
not because I am not willing,
because you are not willing.’
The scholar said,
‘What are you saying I am not willing?
I am here, I am asking you.
I am the one who is asking you and you are saying
I am not willing.’
‘No, the teaching that I give, you will not be willing.’
He said, ‘What is the teaching?’
‘Are you willing?’
‘Anything, I am willing.’
So the master went inside,
brought a… a dirty looking piece of cloth and gave it to him and said,
‘Wear this as your loin cloth.
You take off all your robes and nice clothes;
wear this as your loin cloth.’
The scholar looked at this dirty piece of cloth,
said, ‘What this?’
‘Not just that;
then I will give you an empty can with a string,
wear it around your neck
and I will give you a few sweets
peppermint,
you go on the street to the market place.
All the young boys will look at you and tease you and throw stones at you.
Whoever throws a stone at you, take out a peppermint,
grin at them and give them a peppermint.’
The scholar said,
‘This is ridiculous!
What will happen to me in this town if I do such a ridiculous thing?’
‘See, I told you, you’re not willing for the teaching,’ (Laughs)
because the question is just this
do you want a teaching that you like
or you do you want something that transforms you?
That’s the question.
So now you’re asking this question –
‘I am dead serious’.
So the first and foremost thing is
you must make yourself non-serious, which is not possible;
so the only way you can make yourself non-serious is to be ridiculous,
you know?
Can you do that?
Can you get up and do a jig right now?
Do it. (Questioner doing the jig)
(Laughter, Clapping)
No, you must do it the Indian way; the Indian jig;
no, no you must do the Indian jig. (Questioner doing the jig)
(Laughter, Clapping)
So you see you’re getting little non-serious now, (Laughter)
not dead at least, still serious, not dead.
So just loosen up your life a little bit,
laugh a little more,
involve yourself with people around you,
do things that you think is not so important;
don’t do things which are very important,
do simple things.
It’s very important you do simple things.
Very important things you’re doing in your life,
you will become dead serious.
You know Bertrand Russell, an English man. (Laughs)
Bertrand Russell said,
‘If you’re beginning to think that what you’re doing is very important,
you need to take a holiday.’
So holiday does not mean coming to India. (Laughter)
Holiday is every day in those 24 hours,
you must take a holiday from your seriousness,
from your
Seriousness has come essentially because of your self-importance.
You hold yourself as an important person.
I want you to see you are like a speck of dust in this existence.
Tomorrow morning if you disappear,
for sure in India nobody will miss you,
even Down Under they won't bother much, you know.
A handful of people,
they will also forget soon enough.
Isn't it so?
Oof!
Nature does oof, you are gone
and nothing will happen in this world;
everything will happen wonderfully well
even if you’re not there.
Every human being should be aware of this every moment of his life.
It does not matter what the whole world says about you;
it does not matter how significant a work you are doing,
you must understand that
tomorrow morning the world will go on fine without you,
whoever you maybe.
Isn't it so?
If you constantly remind yourself of this,
you will have no reason to be serious (Laughs),
definitely not dead.
And don’t be dead now,
a time will come.
This’s time to be alive.
We need to understand this
To simply sit here and to know experiencely
That this entire universe is actually a part of me
Will not happen to most people they'll hallucinate for a few moments after that. They will get distracted by something
If you invest your life to create something which got nothing to do with you and something to do with everything
Then slowly it will seep into you into every cell in your body that everything is actually a part of here
To simply sit here and get it. We don't know you may take many lifetimes
Most people won't get it
They may get one thought and tomorrow morning. It'll be out
But if you invest your time energy and life into creating something which is not about you at all
Then slowly it sinks into you
Every cell every atom in the body will soak it up and make you understand that your life
The way you are is actually
all-inclusive
otherwise, it's just a talk
a whole lot of people it's become a fad in the world
I keep sharing this particularly in United States people say we love the universe wow
That is the easiest bloody thing to do because it's not here
If you have to love somebody who's next to you right now?
It takes life. It costs life you know
You may have to give something
If you have a mango in your hand if you love somebody you may have to give it away
But if you love the universe you can eat the mango on Louder universe
it's a wonderful trick a
Very wonderful thing
It is like making all the offerings
JaleBi Pakodi, this that everything
to God
Knowing well he will not eat
After you're the one who gets to eat it in the end algorithmic
Knowing very well that you are the one who will get to eat it
Children wanting to eat till it is perfectly fine. God wanting to eat. Delay be is not okay?
Huh?
Because there is a huge deception in God wanting to eat Jalebi
Children want to eat Jalebi ,Its a simple desire
So this has been going on for a long time
Tricks and tricks and tricks and tricks. That's why
When you have to create something you have to keep your tricks aside, and do what's needed?
No room for tricks if you do tricks
What you're doing will land on your head
You want to build this?
What you have to do you have to do it the way you have to do
If you play tricks this will land on your head
when you're in action with the physical world
You cannot deceive yourself. This is a good thing about the world
But in your own mind you love the universe you know in how many ways you can deceive yourself
Everybody likes to love somebody who's not here
because it's so wonderful and you
Don't have to give away the mango that you have in your hand
You can eat it and love
But if you love the person next to you
This is a problem. You have to give the mango at least half
And the damn mango you can't cut it into half one side will be more one side left
You sat here, and I say and you tell the person next you. I love you mango in hand
There is a tendency wanting to give it away
But that person says no you also have then you cut it one big piece one small piece
Because you have made an unnecessary statement. I love you. You have to give the big piece I
love the universe
You can eat the big piece in the small piece
You love God small piece. You can give big piece you can eat
But if you love somebody next to you big piece you have to give it to them

(Questioner): Namaskaram swami,
the other day you had mentioned that thought is very necessary
for one to take any action,
sometimes I feel the action I’ve taken is based on a thought
that's not mine.
Is that possible for someone to plant a thought in my mind making me
think it’s mine?
(Sadhguru): None of your thoughts are yours.
None of your thoughts are really yours, please see.
Thought is
something that you generate from implanted information,
all kinds of things hitting you.
The way you think right now
depends on what kind of family you were born in,
what kind of parents you had,
what kind of education,
what kind of society,
what kind of social backgrounds,
religious backgrounds,
aren’t all these things deciding how you think?
Yes or no?
For sure, isn’t it?
So how can you say it is your thought?
All kinds of people are working.
Can somebody plant a thought?
Definitely.
Definitely yes.
If you’re talking about
someone consciously wanting to plant a thought in you,
is that possible?
Very much possible
but you shouldn’t get into this mode,
because every time you do something wrong
you will think somebody planted this in my (Laughs)
Even if you let somebody plant it in your head,
it is still your doing, isn’t it?
Yes?
You let somebody plant a thought in you,
that is also your doing, isn’t it?
‘Oh somebody planted a thought in my head, what can I do?’
People are going about this;
this has become a fashion everywhere.
This was an Indian thing.
When Indians got very affluent many generations ago,
and they got naturally lazy
they came to this,
‘Godwilling.’
Anything you ask them they’ll say ‘Godwilling.
‘Godwilling I will get up.’
Who knows when goddamn God is willing?
If I do it, God was willing;
if I don’t do it, he’s not willing.
This is a horrible trick, but it goes on in the world.
Everything that matters to them anyway they will do.
If you ask something they’ll say, ‘Godwilling.’
Yes?
Will they say, ‘If God-willing I will have my dinner?’
No, they will eat.
If you say, ‘Can I have dinner?’
they’ll say, ‘God-willing.’
So can we plant a thought?
Definitely we can,
in fact we can plant a whole philosophy into you if you want.
Why just a thought?
A whole series of thought,
a complex series of thought we can plant into your head
but there are different ways of planting a thought.
There are dark ways of doing it.
There are straight ways of doing it.
There are other ways of doing it,
where a thought is not planted,
you are made to think in a certain way
purely for your wellbeing.
This needs to be done,
otherwise you will just scatter yourself all over the place
and spend your life without any purpose,
without getting anywhere.
The dark ways of doing it involves,
very
various dark arts through which
they will plant negative thoughts in your head,
where you will work for your own destruction.
The straight ways of doing it are the school teachers’ way,
they’re trying to tell you, this is better, this is better, this is better you know, constantly.
Or the marketing managers’ way.
The Cococola – the real thing, the real thing,
the real thing, the real thing.
Now you say, ‘The Real Thing!’
If I say, ‘The Real Thing,’ you will say, ‘Coke.’
Everywhere it’s written, around the world,‘real thing’.
So that is just by repetition.
It’s straight,
if you want you can reject it,
but the first one if you’re vulnerable in some way,
you have no choice, it will anyway enter your life.
The last way of doing it will happen only if you’re willing,
open and receptive,
otherwise that person who does the last way of putting thoughts into you,
is not even interested in doing such things.
Only if you are willing, open and
you want to go in a certain way
but you do not have the necessary grit to hold on
to something that you need to do,
then a thought can be implanted in you in a different way.
So if you’re talking about negative thoughts being implanted into you,
all you have to do is bring some simple meditation or something
where your system get organized in such a way
that these things cannot affect you
or you must carry something with you
which will create a certain cocoon of energies around you
where these things cannot affect you.
There are various ways of
preventing somebody else influencing your thought.
So, I’m also willing to plant a thought in you¸
more than a thought in you.
I can plant an explosive in you if you want.
Not a bomb, an explosive.
You know there’s a difference?
Bomb is purely destructive,
an explosive can be used in so many ways, isn’t it?
If you want I can plant an explosive, why just a thought?
If you simply sit, boom it goes.
I can plant an explosive
explosive of ecstasy if you want.
If you simply close your eyes
There’re lots of people here,
if they just close their eyes, their eyeballs will go pop.
Why just a thought?
Thought is a rudimentary thing, very surface thing.
We can plant energy into you
in such a way that it guides your life wherever you are,
whatever you maybe.
There are better technologies than thoughts.
Sadhguru: Why?
Why?
Why are you making it universal?
You are assuming that.
Okay, you are stressed and strained and what?
Sadhguru: Torture?
Sadhguru: So he has named his wife and children
as stress, strain and torture.
Wife and two children - stress, strain and torture.
How’s that?
I don’t want you to travel on the path of yoga.
Whatever goddamn path you’re travelling on,
take yoga with you.
It will make the path easy and beautiful.
Whether you go north or south,
if it is dark you take a torch, isn’t it?
Only northward people take torch,
southern people take darkness with you,
is there such a thing?
No.
So you getting married is because of your needs.
You were not born with your wife,
were you?
You were born like this,
a complete human being.
Because you have certain needs
physical, psychological, emotional,
maybe financial
social
that also is there, right?
So, various needs;
marriage is generally supposed to be a package
which deals with all these needs
physical needs,
psychological needs,
emotional needs,
social needs,
sometimes financial needs also.
So it is a comprehensive package,
that if you get married all these problems are solved in one shot.
Sometimes they may refuse to fulfill some of your needs,
so you get stressed, strained and tortured.
I want you to understand
you married for your well-being,
not as some sacrifice for somebody’s sake.
You married for your needs and your well-being, isn’t it?
You better remember that all your life.
You married and tied up the other person with you
because you have needs.
You did not do it for the other person’s sake.
Yes or no?
Let’s be straight about this.
Yes or no?
Yes.
You remember this.
If you remember this, you will live in little gratitude, okay?
If not all the five – pancha,
you know the five needs,
at least two you fulfill for me,
thank you very much, isn’t it?
All the five perfectly, maybe they did not fulfill,
at least two or three they fulfilled, right -
your husband or your wife?
Did they, didn’t they?
If they did not fulfill anything,
I don’t think you would be there by now.
Yes or no?
If they did not fulfill any of your needs,
I do not think you would still be there.
They are fulfilling some needs,
a few things maybe they are not able to fulfill.
So are you.
You are also not able to fulfill
every one of the needs of the other person.
Some you are fulfilling, some you are not.
Isn’t it so?
So why did this become stress, strain and torture?
Whichever way you have made it, till now it doesn’t matter;
if you are willing, in three days’ time
it doesn’t matter how bad your situation is,
in three days’ time you can bring it to a semblance of peace.
If not love,
if not ecstasy,
at least you can bring it to a peaceful state in three days’ time
if you are willing, hundred percent.
Yes or no?
Hmm?
At least you can shut-up,
simply, whatever happens.
Peace will happen
and maybe they will love it.
So don’t walk the path of yoga,
whatever the path,
you must carry yoga with you.
If you carry yoga with you,
it’ll light up your path, whatever path you have chosen.
You have chosen your path out of your needs.
You already done it,
so that’s up to you.
Those who have done it,
I would like you to choose your path
not out of your compulsive needs,
but of your conscious needs.
So when that stage in your life comes,
it is time to consciously look at your life and see
will today’s needs mean something to you after five years or ten years?
Will it be worthwhile to tie up your life
for the simple needs that you have today
or will… are these just passing needs for you?
If it’s a very strong need, you must marry.
If it is not a strong need, it’s a passing need,
you can work out your needs probably
by just going to a cinema.
Then no need to get married, you know.
Yes,
many people are like this.
Their needs are not very strong.
It’s just passing,
but social structure tells them you have to.
Not necessary.
It must be a conscious choice.
Whichever way you go, it must be your conscious choice,
not compulsive choices
because if you choose compulsively
you will always take it out on the people around you
because you feel like a slave
and you don’t like it.
So you take it out on them
and they will take it out on you.
So it is not about what you are doing,
it is about how you do it.
What you are doing is according to our requirements,
but how you do it will determine the nature of your life.
Is it an advantage to walk single
rather than walk with people?
Yes,
if you want to walk rapidly.
In Africa there is a saying.
They say,
“If you want to walk quick, walk alone.
If you want to walk long, walk in company.”
If you’re making a long distance journey,
it’s better to have company.
If you’re walking a short distance
and very quick you want to walk,
it’s best to go alone, isn’t it?
Gautama said another thing.
When somebody asked him the same question,
he said,
“It is better to walk alone than to walk with a fool.”
Because by looking at you
he is very clear who else will marry you
so that is Gautama's way of working
So he said
he is always discouraging people to take company
he said
this life is a brief walk
why do you need a company?
When you leave this body it's a long place
there I will be there
this is the offer
But you think life is long,
so maybe you need company.
If you need company you take it,
but how you conduct this company is very important.
If you want to conduct this sensibly,
one of the most important things that you need to do
particularly with your children, you must do this - is
your psychological and your emotional framework
should be around the basic fact of life.
The basic fact of life is that you are mortal.
Your psychological and emotional structure should be formed around your mortality.
This is most important.
If you are constantly aware that this is a brief life,
any moment you will fall dead. Actually
then you would organize your life
and conduct your life in a certain way.
When you know time is ticking away, any moment you will be knocked down,
you have no time to get angry with somebody, isn’t it?
You have no time to fight with somebody here.
You have no time to sit there depressed for a long period of time
because tick, tick, tick, tick, it’s going away.
Because your psychological structure is organized around your immortality,
because of that you have lot of time to fight,
to be depressed,
to be frustrated,
to fret,
to fume -
you have lot of time.
So it’s very, very important that everybody organizes
their psychological and emotional structure
around the mortal nature of our existence.
After all you are just a baton carrier
between the last generation and the next generation, isn’t it?
Yes?
For a brief time it’s in your hands, this world,
afterwards somebody else is going to take it.
You will see taking the baton from the previous generation
happens in most ugly ways,
handing over the baton to the next generation happens in horrible ways,
simply because people’s mind is structured
around their belief of immortality.
They don’t see they are mortal.
If you’re constantly aware that you are mortal,
sense will naturally dawn upon you.
You will have no time for foolishness.
Suppose you are aware that tomorrow you are going to die,
would you spend today fighting with somebody?
Hmm?
Because your time is ticking, isn’t it?
And your time is ticking even now,
not after a doctor diagnoses you with some horrible disease.
Even now it’s ticking.
Isn’t it so?
If you want to explore the possibility of what this is,
the immensity of what this is,
then the time is ticking too rapidly
and time is a extremely relative experience.
If you are joyful and blissful,
even if you live to be hundred, it’s a very brief life,
it’s gone in no time.
So in this brief life,
where do you get time
for stress, strain and torture?
I don’t know where you get time.
This is simply because
you think you are immortal,
this is the biggest mistake you have done.
It is just a brief journey.
You must conduct it as gracefully,
as blissfully as possible.
If you do not know the cosmos,
at least you must know this piece of life
before you fall dead.
That must happen to everybody.
Sadhguru: The question is, is there re-birth,
if it’s there what is the basis for one being to go from one birth to another,
what is it that carries a person from one to another.
Now if you need to understand this,
you must have some understanding of the mechanics of who you are.
I am talking about the mechanics of how a human being is built.
See, when you say I am a human being,
the outermost periphery is the physical body.
In yoga we look at everything as body because it is easier for you to understand it that way.
So we see the body as five dimensions or five sheathes.
Physical body is known as Annamayakosha.
Annamayakosha means -anna means the food, this is food body.
Next one is called Manomayakosha that means it’s the mental body.
The third one is called Pranamayakosha, which means the energy body.
Physical body, mental body, energy body, all these three dimensions are physical.
They are physical existence.
Physical body is very gross, mental body is subtler, energy body is even subtler
but all these three are physical.
This is just like the light bulb is physical, you can see that.
The electricity behind also is physical, isn’t it?
The wire that connects is also physical;
the electrons that flow through the wire also are physical existence.
So similarly,
physical body, mental body, pranic body all are physical dimensions of life.
This physical dimension of life both
in all these three dimensions carries the imprints of karma;
On the body, it is imprinted,
on the mind it's imprinted and on the energy it’s imprinted.
This karmic imprints or the karmic structure, is what holds it together.
Karma is the cement which holds you to the physical body.
Karma is the bondage at the same time,
it’s only because of karmic stuff you can hold on to the body and be here.
This is where spirituality seems to be difficult
because if you try to take it away it doesn’t work,
if you try to add it doesn’t work.
You need to be just there.
If you’re just there, it’s a moment.
Now the next two dimensions are called Vignanamaya kosha and Anandamaya kosha.
Vignanamaya kosha is non-physical but related to the physical.
It is like a transient state.
Anandamaya kosha is completely non-physical.
So, Vignanamaya kosha and Anandamaya kosha means it’s the bliss body.
There is a bliss body inside which is hundred percent non-physical.
It has no form of its own.
Only if the energy body,
the mental body and the physical body are in shape
it can hold the bliss body in shape.
If these things are taken away
the bliss body will just become a part of the cosmos.
So whatever you are referring to as atman or the soul is a fiction actually,
in the sense,
people are describing a certain limitation of the non-physical as a soul
but the body for the soul is still your karma.
If the karmic structure is completely dismantled there is no soul;
everything merges into everything else.
What is referred to as Mahasamadhi or Mahaparinirvana, is just this
that you slowly understand where the keys are
and dismantle the karmic structure so that
you become truly no more.
When somebody dies,
we say this person is no more, that’s not true.
That person is no more the way you know them
but they still very much exist.
Now if you dismantle the karmic structure hundred percent,
now you merge with the existence.
This is what is referred to as mukti, Mahasamadhi
in Hindu tradition it is referred as…to as mukti,
in yogic tradition it is referred to as Mahasamadhi,
in the Buddhist way it is called as Mahaparinirvana,
generally in English we are saying liberation.
Liberation means becoming free from the very process of life and birth and death.
Liberation means becoming free from the basic structures of body and mind
and for all this,
the karmic structure is the strings which hold these things together.
So when a person dies, obviously,
the physical body is something that you borrowed from the earth.
This body is just earth, isn't it?
You understand?
This physical body is just a piece of earth,
which is right now prancing around this.
But you have to pay it back, atom to atom.
No interest though,
but you have to pay back every atom.
You won’t be allowed to carry a single atom from this planet,
nobody has managed it. (Laughs)
Physical body will fall apart,
the mental body and the pranic body,
depending upon the strength of your karma goes on.
If the karmic structure is very intense, unfinished,
then it has to finish it.
If the karma has become weak because it has run its course,
then it very easily finds another body.
If it has to find another body, the intensity of this structure should come down,
it should become passive.
If it is very intense, it cannot find, it has to hang.
So this is what you are referring to as ghosts.
Somebody is dead;
his karmic structure is still intense because it’s not over.
Now he needs much more time to find another body, he still exists.
And the more intense his karmic structure is,
the more visible he becomes or more experientially available to people.
There are innumerable such beings all around you,
if you …whether you know it or you do not know it
but most of them you won’t feel because their karma is dissipated.
They are just waiting for more dissipation before they find another body.
But if their karma is very intense -
this is why they told you in the tradition
if somebody dies unnaturally,
either by accident or suicide or some other way, they will become ghosts
it is not so, everybody becomes.
It is just that they are more experience-able.
They are more available to your experience
because they have more intense karmic structures.
So you …people may experience them a little more than other beings who die of old age.
If one completes his allotted karma for that life he will die just like that.
Without disease, without accident, without any injury. When one dies simply like that,
that person may find another body within hours.
This is why in this tradition always they said
if one completes his life and dies peacefully it’s the best way to die
because he need not hang around,
immediately it goes on.
Now when you walk the spiritual path,
the ultimate goal for every spiritual seeker is
he wants to break this whole process.
Or otherwise to use an analogy,
we can say what you call as my soul right now is like a bubble.
The outer periphery of the bubble is your karmic structure,
inside there is air.
Suppose you blow the bubble, you burst the bubble, where is the air?
Where is your air?
There is no such thing as your air;
it’s become part of everything.
So what you call as soul is fictitious
because there is no such thing as your soul and my soul and somebody else’s soul.
Right now this unbounded-ness is contained in the limited karmic structure,
so it makes you believe as if this is a separate entity.
If you take away the keys which hold the karmic structure,
then it just collapses.
So this after life, next birth,
don’t believe all this nonsense
but right now if you sit here and just close your eyes,
you can clearly see more than this body you are, isn’t it?
Questioner: Namaskaram. Sadhguru, in one of your videos,
you say that the problem with the world is that
most people lack the intensity.
Sadhguru: ___ (Unclear-what?)
Questioner: Most people lack the necessary intensity.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement)
Questioner: And then you say the way is dhyana.
So intensity is more associated to fierceness in personality
and dhyana is more associated to calmness.
So they’re somehow counterintuitive.
Can you elaborate a little?
Sadhguru: People think peace means rest in peace (Laughter)
because their idea of peace is death.
Peace can be very intense.
Peace can be tremendously intense because
peace means the reverberations of life have become subtle and intense.
Action means reverberations of life are not so subtle,
it is at a certain level.
So peace happens not because
Peace may happen if somebody is dead
but to be alive and peaceful means you need to be highly intense state of energy,
otherwise you can’t be peaceful.
The reason why most people who don’t have any problems as such,
you know after all they’re trying to earn a living,
reproduce and bring up their children and die one day,
just for that they’re freaking simply because of lack of intensity.
Because life is happening at a low ebb,
naturally everything is a problem.
If it rises a little bit, suddenly you have a little clearer view of everything.
For this, you need a higher intensity of energy within you
and the yogic system is essentially focused towards that.
Dhyana does not mean (Gestures) (Laughter).
No (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let’s take the next question,
here, right here in the front row, yeah.
Questioner: Sadhguru. What I get from Isha’s philosophy,
if I may say there is,
is that you need to see internally, in your interiority,
you need to fix it internally before fixing your external situations.
But is it also not right
is it also not very important to do the right thing externally, you know?
Just to make myself more clear you know,
if I be more precise
Sadhguru: No, no, I’m clear, I get the question (Laughter).
Why,
do I look so dumb (Laughter)?
Questioner: Let’s say you know, if somebody
Sadhguru: I got it.
Questioner: Yeah.
Sadhguru: I got it.
Questioner: If somebody is born
Sadhguru: I got the question (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: Isha’s philosophy is not about looking internally or externally.
It is just that
if you’re looking for mangoes, you look up the tree,
you don’t dig the earth, all right (Barkha Dutt Laughs)?
But if you’re looking how to plant a mango tree,
then you dig the earth.
You’re looking for mangoes if you dig the earth, will you find it, I’m asking?
So if you… inner things- you must look inward,
outer things-you must look outward.
There is no such philosophy –
“Look out or look in.”
Wherever the damn thing is, look there (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: Like you know, Shankaran Pillai went for a job interview (Laughter)
and they asked him,
“Which is further, Mumbai or moon?”
He thought profoundly and then said,
“Mumbai.”
They said, “How do you say this?”
He said, “I can see the moon,
I can’t see Mumbai” (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, last question, yeah.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru. I just want to ask
Barkha Dutt: Hold the mike closer to you.
Questioner: Yeah. I just want to ask you that everybody’s perception of good and bad is different
and what do you think if we start manifesting our own good and bad,
what’ll be the state of the society?
Sadhguru: Hmm, maybe you won’t have power tonight (Barkha Dutt Laughs).
I think I already made this clear.
The biggest problem with the world is there’re too many good people,
not enough sensible people.
Sense is life-specific, okay?
Goodness need not be life-oriented,
goodness may be going to heaven.
And the moment –
I want you to understand this dangerous concept,
people don’t address this –
the moment you believe
suppose I believe there is heaven and it’s a beautiful place
and you can live in the company of gods,
should I send you there today or no?
If I really care for you, I’m saying (Laughter).
Yes?
If I really care for you
and if I believe there’s a great place,
should I send you there or not?
This is a dangerous thing, do you understand?
If you stretch it to its logical end, it’s a really dangerous thing.
The moment I believe there is a fantastic place up there,
I really love you and I want you to go there, you know (Laughter)?
Tch,
yes (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, let me just end by asking you something
that we haven’t spoken about and
then I’ll hand it over to Chiki.
You said you love machines.
Sadhguru: I didn’t say I love them (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: Okay, you like machines.
Sadhguru: I
Barkha Dutt: Or they’re useful.
Sadhguru: They work.
Barkha Dutt: Have our lives been overtaken by gadgets?
Sadhguru: Not mine.
Barkha Dutt: No?
Sadhguru: Definitely not,
I use all the gadgets
but they don’t overtake me.
These are fantastic things in our life.
Things… See, in every way,
compared to how a human being was,
let’s say hundred years ago, you’re almost superhuman.
Tch, hundred years ago,
if I could just pick up something from my pocket and talk to somebody in America right now,
I would be superhuman.
Why superhuman?
If I said “I’m God” people would have believed me,
hundred years ago.
Five hundred years ago, if I just had a light bulb,
I would have become God on this planet,
I want you to know.
Look at the things we have today,
we are really superhuman.
Once this kind of capability has come to us,
little more sense has to rise,
little more awareness and consciousness has to arise.
If this doesn’t happen, this capability will turn against us.
This is what you’re saying.
Now gadgets are freaking people.
Why?
It’s a simple thing.
You… If you want to use it,
you can use it or you can keep it aside.
Because you are in a compulsive state,
if you start using a cell phone, you can’t stop it,
even in your sleep you’re texting.
See the boy is (Gestures towards somebody)
he’s in a… he’s not with me… he’s in… looking at me in the screen (Laughter).
Now, this is the same thing.
If food is good, if you start eating you don’t know when to stop.
If you start drinking, you don’t know when to stop.
If you start doing something, you don’t know when to stop.
The same thing,
it is not about the gadget,
it is not about the food,
it is just that there is not enough consciousness,
there is compulsiveness.
Everything is happening compulsively.
Instead of addressing the root,
you’re trying to kill the gadget.
Gadget is a fantastic thing,
every damn gadget has enhanced our life in a huge way, isn’t it?
Don’t curse the gadgets.
It is just that compulsiveness has to go.
Questioner : What do you think of time?
Sadhguru: See from where to where we’re jumping.
Questioner : Time is a game and
Sadhguru: Yes, definitely,
otherwise how do I tell you what time to come for dinner?
If we all become timeless,
how to invite you for dinner, tell me?
Questioner: We are all slaves to it.
Sadhguru: We don’t have to be slave to it.
It’s a device that we used for our convenience.
See if you don’t divide this day into twenty-four hours,
would you know when to come here for dinner?
It’s a convenience,
where is the question of enslavement?
See, you may come when you’re hungry,
but there may be no dinner when you come.
You may not feel hungry till one o’clock in the morning,
that doesn’t mean it’s the dinner time here. Tch… See
Questioner: When you bound by it
Sadhguru: See, any convenience,
any convenience that we create for yourself,
time or money or a car or any technology
that we created for our convenience, out of our unawareness,
out of our unawareness we get enslaved to it.
There is nothing wrong with the device that we created.
There’s nothing wrong with the car,
there’s nothing wrong with the money,
there’s nothing wrong with the time.
You got enslaved to it out of your unawareness, that’s the problem, isn’t it?
Time is not the problem,
money is not the problem,
car is not the problem, any other
technology is not the problem.
You got enslaved to it, that is the problem.
Enslavement happened because you’re unaware.
So your unawareness is the problem.
So how to become aware?
What is this awareness?
Awareness is on many different levels.
One can
what you’re aware of is all that exists for you.
This must be understood.
Right now you’re sitting here, don’t turn back and see,
right now there’s a huge dinosaur standing behind you.
You’re not aware of it, does it exist for you?
Questioner: No.
Sadhguru: No. So it doesn’t matter such a huge animal is standing there,
you are not aware of it,
so it doesn’t exist for you.
So only what you’re aware of exists for you.
Right now your awareness is limited to small aspect of your life.
Whole aspect of spirituality means to become aware of everything that you are
so that before you go, you know life,
you experience life in its totality,
to live totally. To live and to live totally, that’s spirituality.
So that you know life in all dimensions,
you don’t go just knowing a little part of your life,
you want to know all of it.
So if you want to know all of it, how?
If we have to use an analogy,
let’s say we turn down the voltage for the lights,
now let’s say just one light is there,
it just lights up only that much.
Only that much we see.
If you turn up the voltage, suddenly you’re able to see much more
because the light has spread.
So awareness is just like this;
right now your energies, your body, your emotion, your mind,
everything is functioning with certain limited voltage.
You crank up the voltage, suddenly you start seeing so many things
which are not in your experience till that moment.
So in a way, to put it very simply,
to put it technically, you need to turn up your voltage.
The voltage,
life voltage within you –
today she was saying she doesn’t want to sleep because she wants to live.
If you don’t want to sleep,
“I don’t want to sleep,” will not take away sleep.
You turn up your voltage, suddenly no sleep.
You can turn up your voltage simply with your enthusiasm,
but that will not take you all the way.
There are other kinds of technologies to turn up your voltage in a certain way
where all the time you’re high.
See, within myself right now, I’m absolutely drunk.
Not with alcohol, okay?
I never touched it.
I’m totally drunk within myself.
Am I balanced enough and logical enough to handle any situation?
Yes?
So all the time I’m fully drunk on one level,
on another level I’m perfectly sane.
If I want to flip, any moment I’ll flip.
If you’re like this, inside you’re fully charged,
outside you’re controlled,
this is what is needed in your life
if you want to experience life in its totality.
You try to exercise control over your life
and you started putting this control over your very process of life,
so life is happening like a trickle.
Life within you should happen like a huge explosion,
but outside it is fully controlled.
You will see initially when you go into a phase like this,
even the outside tends to happen like an explosion for sometime
but within a limited period of time
you’ll gather control over it.
Outside is controlled, inside is an explosion.
That’s how it should be.
Every moment of your life,
within you life should be an absolute explosion.
Outside of you it is properly controlled.
When it’s like this you will get to use your physical body, your mind, your emotion
everything that you have to its fullest extent.
Things that you never thought you’re capable of,
suddenly you start doing
simply because your voltage is full.
Shekhar: If there is a natural inclination to life,
unless interfered with,
forest will find the full potentials of the beings of the forest,
unless interfered with?
Human beings are the biggest interference.
Is there some interference within us
that made us go in a way that we are narrowing our own definition of ourselves down
to a point where we are not even aware
that there is something called a greater potential?
Sadhguru: See, one reason is
the route that modern science has taken
Modern science has taken that route largely in reaction
to very dogmatic religions
under which… under… under the umbrella of which
the modern science evolved,
particularly in Europe.
That’s where the whole Renaissance system happened.
If you look at science, it’s horribly reactive
and already made conclusions.
A scientist should be inquisitive.
He should be in wonderment, not in suspicion.
But he is in suspicion because
The whole attitude of science has become like this,
because it is in reaction to dogmatic religions
which tried to enforce their own whatever rubbish on the science in its early stages.
Science is like a juvenile who is reacting
to something that was imposed upon him as a child;
still science is in that stage.
Slowly it’s growing out of it,
but largely in that stage.
Anything, first dismiss it.
No.
A scientist should be interested in everything, isn’t it?
A true scientist should be interested in everything.
If somebody says “I walked in the temple, tears are coming,
please experiment what is happening here!”
No, he first dismisses it as rubbish.
No, he must experiment
in whatever way possible, isn’t it?
No, he just dismisses it
because he comes from that background
where dogmatic religions enforced and tried to stop the development of science
in so many different ways.
So, largely that religious belief,
which comes from certain areas of the world,
which is so strong, and believes in silly things
as if they are the most profound things,
okay?
So these silly things have been imposed on people for centuries
and when science reacted to that
it looked like a great revolution,
it’s called Renaissance –
it’s a revolution.
But that kind of investigation,
wanting to look at everything,
is not new to us here.
The whole spiritual process has always been about
looking at everything with fresh eyes.
We don’t even trust the two eyes,
we want to open an extra eye and look at it (Laughter), okay?
Because we know very easily
you can be
your senses can be contaminated with memory.
Your eyes are deeply contaminated with your own memory
because depending upon the type of memory you have,
accordingly what you see looks
beautiful,
ugly,
okay, not okay,
good, bad, everything
because it is loaded with memory.
So a thoughtless eye is what we want to develop.
So the whole system of yoga is
the pinnacle of yoga is shown as a third eye,
because third eye is a thoughtless eye.
today
That’s why I said you must ask the question without your intellect,
use your intelligence.
But without the filter of your intellect,
ask a question –
then you will come up with crazy questions.
Without using the filter of your intellect,
if you just find expression to your logic,
crazy things will happen.
Crazy means socially crazy but they’re very life oriented stuff.
And that’s how you fall in love,
that’s how moments of genius and creativity happens to a human being
when you do not use the filter of your intellect.
I am saying why don’t you live like that every moment of your life?
Why is the spark of life and genius
only here and there?
It must be every moment you must be sparking if you want to fire and go somewhere, right?
You know, within a
at least in the older engines there’s a sparking plug, okay?
It has to spark all the time.
If it doesn’t spark, off and on it sparks, that’s a lousy machine.
That’s a lousy human being too,
who doesn’t spark all the time,
who sparks once in a way.
Sadhguru: the thing is
this is not something that you have to practice.
Is it true, is it a fact
that the body that you carry today,
which you imagine is yours,
is the soil of this planet
and must have been carried by many, many, many creatures,
not just men and women,
by every other creature, plant, animal, insect, worm should have used this soil
at some point in these a few million years or billion years of existence of this planet?
For sure it is so, isn't it?
So what you think is your body is just planets' way of recycling itself.
So right now it is with you.
If you want to claim “it is mine,” you can claim it,
but mother earth will teach you a lesson one day and show you that it's not yours.
Not an atom of it can you take anywhere.
So these are fundamental facts.
So what I told you in the satsang is not that you have to practice this.
This is a reality.
This is the truth about your life.
This truth
Truth cannot be practiced.
Truth cannot be invented.
It… You can only remind yourself.
You can realize and remind.
So if you have realized,
if experiential realization has not happened,
at least intellectually you have realized that the body that you carry
The air that you're breathing right now,
which is an important part of your life,
the water that you drink,
the food that you eat,
just flows through you and makes you who you are for this moment.
It is not something that is either you nor is it yours.
You must be grateful that you're allowed to use this to whatever extent you wish.
I only hope people will use it sensibly.
The important thing is to be conscious that this is the reality.
Whatever we are unconscious of, we will become ignorant of it after some time.
So if you are conscious that this is not even yours,
you're allowed to use it –
a sense of gratitude will arise within you.
And once you know this is not you and this is not yours,
the… your ability to use it also will be greatly enhanced
and you will naturally start exploring what is the nature of who you are.
This is not something that I have to guide it.
I don't have to tell you, “please seek your inner nature.”
If you know that everything that you think or imagine as ‘myself’ right now
is actually not even yours
if that realization sinks into you,
longing to know what is the nature of who you are
is a very natural process,
and it will be a successful process because you have set the necessary ambience.
Without setting this ambience, being deeply attached,
being deeply engaged with the body,
thinking ‘it is me’ or ‘mine,’
and trying to… talking about self-realization
is like mooring your boat and then going on using the
you know, going on rowing the boat –
it’s not going to go anywhere.
Obviously you have no intention of going anywhere unless you untie your ropes.
So this is just the fundamental ambience that is necessary for one to move forward.
Without setting this,
it is… it is like you’re tied up and you want to row the boat
it’s not going to go anywhere.
So do not practice this, just remind yourself -
this is the reality.
Spend some time with this truth.
It is true that it is not actually yours, it only passes through you.
And see how… how much of the time you can stay conscious of that.
Remind yourself, that's all, there is nothing to practice.
It is there staring in your eyes with every breath.
Can you just inhale and hold the air that you inhale?
You have to exhale.
That is telling you that you can't even hold it for a moment - it can't be yours.
If the air that you breathe is not yours –
the water that you drink, how did it become yours?
The food that you eat, how did it become yours?
The land that you walk upon, how did it become yours?
So this is not a new idea or concept.
This is a reality which is constantly staring you in the face,
but most people choose to ignore.
When you ignore reality that is when you become ignorant
Sadhguru: Supposed to be the last day of the calender year.
So this end of the year
we need some measure,
otherwise if there was no count of New Years
and some of you counting your birthdays.
I don’t trust you on the birthdays
because you may keep on counting
eighteen, eighteen, eighteen, eighteen (Laughter).
At least you say this is going to be 2015,
I’m sure you’re not going to say 2014, 2014 next year,
no (Laughs).
So we will stick to the New Year.
The idea of counting time is because we need some measure,
we need some kind of milestone just to know
“Are we going forward or backward in our lives.”
I want you to look 2014,
you as a human being
not your business,
not your career,
not other things,
those things matter but you take care of that
but as a human being have you moved… forward or backward?
This is something that you have to evaluate today,
you must evaluate every night
but if you are a lousy accountant of life,
at least once a year you must evaluate.
If you evaluate once a decade it’ll be too late,
believe me,
you can’t fix it.
Once a day,
once a week,
once a month,
if you are evaluating,
you will be able to take corrective measures in one’s life.
At least once a year if you are evaluating
“Have I moved forward as a human being or have I become backward?”
Simple way of checking this is 2013 how I was,
2014 am I a little more joyful human being,
am I little more relaxed,
am I little more compassionate,
am I little more loving,
you just have to check.
Don’t… Don’t go by your family’s judgment
because there may be many local prejudices you know (Laughs),
we don’t know
vested interests.
Family, neighbors, friends, these are all vested interests.
If you don’t do what they think you should do,
they will think you have fallen, (Laughs).
Thirty-three years ago everybody thought I have fallen and lost my mind, okay?
Today the same people clap their hands, that’s different
because… that’s for a different reason
but I’m saying even if you’ve taken up positive steps
somebody else may be saying something.
So I don’t want somebody else’s evaluation of who you are.
Within yourself sincerely you look and see
have you moved forward as a human being?
Because you are one year closer to your grave,
tch,
are you going to at least die as a better human being if not live (Laughs)?
Suppose you and me die tomorrow morning,
are we dying as a little better human beings than what we were a year ago
this is an important question.
If we live, wonderful!
Suppose we die, there’s no regret (Laughs).
Very important or no?
Hmm?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If we live as better human beings,
wonderful for us,
wonderful for everybody around us.
Suppose we die,
at least there is no regret what a horrible creature I am and I’m dying
and everybody will be glad, that’s different (Laughter),
So if you are going to make people around you joyful
and relieved only when you die tch,
that’s (Laughs)… that’s not a good way to live.
They are joyful because of your presence is good.
They are joyful because you’re absent is not a good thing,
that’s important.
It’s important to check this
and the coming year you must have a plan
how to become a better human being than the way I was in 2014.
I want you to have a clear cut plan,
“How am I going to be a better human being, what is my plan.”
You must have a plan of your own.
We can help you with a GPS (Laughter),
how to negotiate your plan,
but you must have a plan.
Don’t wait for cosmic geometry to come together.
Cosmic geometry is in a wonderful place,
otherwise it would have crashed.
Only because cosmic geometry is perfect, it is going on, isn’t it?
Did you see any extra noises,
loud noises coming up today morning when the sun was coming up?
Friction - kut, kut, kut, kut, kut, kut, kut, (Gestures)
it came up like that like a old machine (Laughter)?
Very smoothly it came up, isn’t it?
Hmm?
Absolutely smooth, you didn’t even notice it (Laughter),
so smoothly it came up.
So the cosmic geometry is going perfect.
You don’t worry about where the stars are,
what is the arrangement, is it okay, not okay,
it’s perfect.
It is you, are you going to ride it or are you going to be crushed by it, that’s a question.
So, you must have a clear cut plan for 2015
“How am I going to be a better human being within myself.”
What happens around you is a consequence
of the way the world is running and the way we conduct things, many things.
Consequences are okay but how we are is very important
because this is what determines the quality of who we are.
What happens – we have little more, little less,
this happens, that happens,
that is not the quality of your life,
that is just the content of your life.
Content should not decide the quality,
it is always the context which decides the quality of one’s life.
So the coming year, the plan tch must be good,
a workable plan.
Hmm?
I want you to be an ambitious plan, not a stupid, silly, tiny little plan,
a very ambitious plan
“by the end of this year I must be in this kind of a state.”
Hmm?
Time to plan,
the coming year we have a clear cut plan and we work through the plan,
a deliverable plan,
an ambitious one,
not a small one.
I want all of you to evolve a plan like that,
if necessary write it down
“This is how I’m going to be in the coming year,”
whatever is your idea of being better human being.
You don’t have to go by my prescriptions
but if you’re better you must be functioning
within yourself at least with less friction,
less struggle,
less turmoil.
Yes?
That’s an indication that you’re better.

Sadhguru: You don’t have to go beyond all these things;
you just have to stop creating those things. (Laughs)
Your fear, your anger
all these are products of a mind which you have not taken charge of.
Your mind is capable of producing joy,
your mind is capable of producing fear,
your mind is capable of producing anxiety, turmoil, tranquility, agony, ecstasy
it can produce anything.
It is producing things that you do not want,
simply because you do not know how to handle it.
There is no need for anybody to handle their fear, their anger, their whatever;
nor is there any need for anybody to seek happiness or peace or joy or blissfulness,
there is no need.
All you have to do is you have to spend some time,
you have to do certain sadhana to find out where the keyboard is
for this fantastic computer that is loaded on your head.
You don’t know where the keyboard is,
so you’re punching all the wrong numbers,
so all kinds of things are happening.
So, either you can make this mind into a miracle,
or you can make this mind into a misery-manufacturing machine.
So the misery in the form of anger, fear,
you don’t have to do anything about it;
you just have to stop the production line,
you know, not the product. (Laughs)
You just have to stop the production line and start a different product.
You must see the joy is coming out of it,
bliss is coming out of it,
because the same mind is capable of that also.
Sometimes, you’re joyful?
Sometimes? (Laughter)
a young man like this? (Laughs)
So it is capable of joy also,
so you just have to
J is always here. (Gestures the location of ‘J’ in keyboard)
You know the computer?
That’s where it is. (Laughs)
If you do like this, like this, like this – misery, misery, misery. (Laughs)
And if you hold one button - misery misery misery misery misery – it’ll multiply. (Laughter)
You should know how to keep your hands off the keyboard
and just punch what you want.
Now unawares you don’t even know where it is, it’s punching;
if you can't think properly… (Gestures itching at his neck) (Laughter)
That’s not where it is, wrong buttons.
So,
there is sadhana to take charge of your body,
to take charge of your mind,
to take charge of your energies,
to take charge of everything that you are,
rather than taking charge of it you are wishing for a nice product.
It will not happen like that.
Life has never worked like that,
not for anybody.
Never ever has anything worked for anybody by doing all the wrong things.
Unless you do the right things,
right things do not happen to you at all.
why as a western society do we tend to
Feel that intellect is more important in dealing with situations on a day-To-day basis rather than feeling [I]
Think [it's] a European hangover
[day] [card]
[I]
Think for long periods of time human societies have suffered this struggle for survival
When you want to survive your ability to discriminate is the most important quality otherwise, you don't survive
Till we create kind of societies where everybody can survive
This cannot be put to rest
So this is the reason why?
Eastern Societies did not bank so much on intellect
but on intelligence
there's a distinct difference because
probably in English language
There is no words to describe different aspects of one's intelligence in Sanskrit [language]
There are at least eight dimensions of your intelligence
So intellect is just one of them intellect is very useful for survival process because it gives you
Discriminatory capability if you allow your intellect to find out anything suppose you want to know this flower through your intellect
You will see the only thing you will do is pull it apart and try to know it
Dissection is the way of the intellect so if you want to know your mother, please don't dissect
That's not the way life happens, if you want to know life in its entirety you need other dimensions of intelligence
because
intellect has given
ability to survive and a certain sense of dominance over others
We have become devotees of intellect
Intellect is a wonderful thing no question about that
But you need to understand
Human intellect functions only from the limited data that it is Gathered it cannot explore anything entirely new
you can only project from what you know to another dimension and
You can never project into an unknown dimension through what you know
Right now, that's the reason why
I would say western societies have been on a treadmill for a long time
They run a lot and they get fit, but they don't go anywhere
Fitness happens of course
Okay, now when we talk about human identity and false association with certain stereotypes. Why do we always
strive to
to be a certain stereotype. I mean why does everybody in
Pennsylvania want to have a big house with a white picket fence?
Why is that the status of having arrived?
because
This is a society this idea of role model is essentially from the West
So a few months ago. I was being interviewed by someone from here and
this lady asked me who is your role model Sadguru, I said, I don't roll with the models
Such an iDEa never occurred to me
It never occurred to me
How should I shape myself in whose image that never occurred to us?
Because the east is always looking at how to turn inward and discover the deeper potential in you
Never going out to be like somebody else
This is something which is there in the natural ethos of India that you cannot be somebody else
you can never ever be someone else you can only be yourself and
How to make this yourself into your full potential full-blown growth is all
the traditional yogic examples go like this if a mango tree
Looks at a coconut tree and thinks coconut. Tree is taller and aspires to become a coconut tree
It will become a no good mango tree
so
Every life is unique in its own way and has its own place
The only thing that life has to do is to find the necessary knowledge meant to get full-Blown Growth
If you become a full-blown yourself, and that's all you can do otherwise you will become pretentious, so the problem is
Once once you go by your intellect these two things already connected once you go over your intellect
You will have a whole lot of information, but you don't know anything
This is Modern education
You have a whole lot of information with you, everybody is rattling out
What in a dinner party you can see people saying exact distance between planet Earth and put you know planet Mars and everything
But what relevance is it?
It is just that you can gather information like this when you have information
You have a false sense of feeling that you know everything, but you know nothing
It may help you in the financial market to have information, but with life. What is needed is not information
What is needed is profoundness of
Purchase that you have into life you need traction into life
Experiencing life you cannot know it
If you read a book and you think you know life or you figure out something in your head?
And you think you know it, No, you have to experience it, the profoundness of your experience is what makes this life
So if you go by the intellect, imitation is a natural process, and that's how the role models come
Can tell you story?
Please
I Always seek your permission because the moment I start once upon a time a lot of people think it's bedtime. You know
That's the only time somebody told them a story
so this happened in early 20th century
1910
There was a man whose name was Topi Walla. Topi walla means a hat seller. You know people second names indicate their trade sometimes
So he's going from Village to Village, town to Town selling hats in the tropical heat
One afternoon he felt tired and he went and sat down under a tree
opened his meager Lunch ate and
dozed off
After a little while he opened his eyes and to his
Horror all the hats were gone
He looked all over the place no hats
When you you do everything possible when you don't know what else to do
People pray, so he looked up to pray and he saw a bunch of monkeys sitting there all hats on
So he screamed at them they screamed back at him
He abused them they abused in their own language
He picked up, whatever he could and threw it to them
They picked up, whatever they couldn't throw it back at him not knowing what to do out of sheer frustration
he took his hat and flung it on the ground all the monkeys took their heads and flung it on the ground and
He picked them up and went about his business
2013
December 21st
another man was going around selling hats his name also happens to be topi Walla and
One afternoon he went inside under a tree. It is elaborate lunch 21st century you know and
Promptly fell asleep after some time he woke up hats gone. He didn't look here and there he looked straight up a
Bunch of monkeys were sitting hats on he got up and jived. They all jived. He made funny faces. They made funny faces
He had all the fun. He wanted to have when he was done
He picked up his head and flung it on the ground a baboon of a monkey quickly came down
picked up the hat
Walked towards him gave him a tight slap in the face and said you idiot you think only you had a grandfather
So there is substantial evidence
There is evidence. That monkeys are evolving, okay?
Now once you go where the limitations of your intellect you are still a hunter and Gatherer
maybe instead of gathering pieces of meat and leather and bone and
Tooth of animals today you gather information you know the distance between Mars and Sun and this and that
Maybe you Gather but still the nature of the intellect is to Gather by Gathering if you gather so much
Somebody who has this much in front of that person in comparison to that person you look better
But in the in the experience of life, you will not feel any better
So if you have gathered that much if somebody has gathered this much then in front of that person you feel like nothing
So gathering is always by comparison your own gathering has no meaning
It is only in relation to somebody else's gathering being more bigger than yours
Or in other words in somewhere you start enjoying somebody else's incapability or failure or whatever
So this is the nature of the intellect because it survives on what you have Gathered
Sadhguru: Because what is human is not an established state.
It is a possibility.
It is not a fixed state.
If this possibility has to be
made use of,
there is a whole system of understanding that needs to happen.
Understanding the mechanics of how this life functions
and what we can do with it.
This mechanics,
this technology,
this science .
we are referring to as yoga
I don’t know what types of stuff you’re doing
but my experience in United States particularly in California,
lot of people believe yoga started in California. (Laughter)
Yes. (Laughs)
I met somebody who seriously believed it was Madonna who started yoga. (Laughs)
Yes. (Laughter)
So this mechanics of life
this is as simple as this.
I am sure almost all of you are carrying an instrument,
some kind of electronic instrument, a phone at least,
the more you know about this phone the better you can use it, is that so?
Last year the cell phone companies in India made a survey.
India is the largest cell phone growing market
for telecommunications right now.
Every month we are adding about five and a half million cell phones. Okay.
In a year about sixty million cell phones are being added
to the service
because everybody is having three, four, five these days (Laughs)
They made a survey (Laughter)
that’s a second one,
you haven’t read the first one.
They made a survey and
they have found out that ninety seven percent of the people are using
only seven percent of the capabilities that are there in an ordinary phone.
I am not talking about the smart phone.
I am talking about the dumb phone.
In the dumb phone, ninety seven percent of the people are using only
seven percent of it’s capabilities.
So they were comtemplating,
if we remove ninety percent of the electronics, still most people will never know.
And we can even give them a five hundred rupee discount.
They will be happy; we will happy, you know.
May be they have already taken it off, we don’t know.
Only if you try to use all of them, all the functions,
then you realize something is not working.
So in a little gadget you are using only seven percent.
This is the gadget.
Every damn gadget has come out of this.
How much percentage,
do you think,
are you employing this gadget?
Just make a guess.
Hmm?
How much percentage?
Two, five,
you are being very generous to yourself. (Laughter)
It’s well below one percent ,
because for your survival process
to conduct your life in the material world,
you do not even need one percent of what this is.
This is capable of perceiving the whole cosmos.
If you prepare it properly,
if you hold it,
it’s like an antenna.
If you hold it in the right position,
it can just grasp everything in the existence.
It is just that we are doing all kinds of things with it
because right now
our whole perception of life is limited
to the physical nature of the existence.
Physical is like the peel of the fruit. It has no purpose of it’s own.
In the sense, if you have the fruit, the moment you eat the fruit,
the peel goes straight to the trash can, isn’t it?
The peel is only a package.
Only because the fruit is valuable,
package is important.
Right now as you sit here, this body is very important.
You have to feed this; you have to clothe this; you have to decorate this;
you have to pamper this in so many ways.
Tomorrow morning
that something inside which you never experienced
if that goes away nobody wants to have any business with this.
Yes?
Only because the fruit is inside,
this peel has become very valuable.
Now yoga means
not just about twisting your body;
not about standing on your head; not about holding your breath;
all these things a circus artist can do better than most yogis.
Really,
yes or no?
You don’t think so?
A circus artist can do far better than most yogis
in terms of twisting the body, doing this, doing that,
holding different positions,
that is not the purpose of yoga.
Unfortunately if you utter the word yoga
people think
you have to be in some impossible posture.
Yoga is not about postures;
it is just a miniscule aspect of yoga.
Yoga means in your experience everything has become one.
The word yoga means union.
What is the union?
What can unite with what?
As you sit here,
your idea and your sense and your experience of who you are is very strong.
You are here as an individual.
But what the trees are exhaling right now
you are inhaling;
what you are exhaling, the trees are inhaling.
Or in other words
one half of your lung is hanging up there.
Yes or no?
This is not just in terms of breath.
Today modern physics is proving to you that
as you sit here
every sub atomic particle in your body is
in constant transaction with everything else in the existence.
If this transaction stops you will cease to exist.
So yoga means
to know it by experience.
Modern science is proving to you
the whole existence is just one energy.
The religions of the world
have been screaming for a long time
that god is everywhere;
whether you say god is everywhere or you say everything is one energy,
are we talking about the same reality or a different reality?
God is everywhere, everything is the same energy,
are we talking about the same reality or different reality?
Same reality.
It is just that a scientist has never experienced this.
He has arrived it through mathematical deductions.
A religious person has not experienced this.
He believes it because it is written somewhere or it is said by somebody.
If you are a hard case,
that you are not willing to settle for deductions or belief systems
then you become a yogi,
yes,
if you are a very hard nut, you want to know it yourself,
then you become a yogi.
You want to know the union of the existence;
you want to know the oneness of what it is;
not believing it.
Like you experience the five fingers of your hand
if you can experience everything around you
then we say you are in yoga.
Sadhguru:In the yogic system,
the time between
summer solstice and winter solstice
is generally referred to as sadhana pada.
Particularly between,
starting from the guru poornima,
which is the first full moon after summer solstice,
or the southern run of the sun,
to winter solstice,
or few days after that,
till probably fourth of January,
or fourth or fifth, of January.
This phase is referred to as sadhana pada,
or time to do sadhana.
At a time,
particularly in the northern hemisphere,
when sadhana yields its best results.
After the fourth or probably the sixth of January,
this is known as a kaivalya pada
that means this is a time to harvest.
This is a time to reap the benefits of one’s
one’s sadhana.
You may be studying through the year,
but it’s at the examination time that you really
it really picks up pace (Laughs), isn’t it?
So similarly, this is the time to rev it up a bit.
There are many aspects to this.
But the most important being
the shift in relationship between the sun and the planet
has a certain impact on the system.
The whole tradition of
how to make use of these changes which are happening to our planet,
of which we are just a part
to swing with the planet, not against it.
The nature of human consciousness is such
you can do things without considering whatever movements that are happening in the natural scape.
But, that is usually for those who are on the ascetic path.
Even the Adiyogi himself made changes for the seasons,
considered the natural movement of energy and impact that the planet has
and kind of fine-tuned his own sadhana.
So it doesn’t matter who we are, still it’s relevant.
The choice is either to swim against the current or with it.
It is sensible to go with it.
It is not that you cannot swim against it.
You can, but unnecessary effort.
What could be done with ease,
if you do it with a lot of difficulty -
if I say
If I ask you how much is two plus two,
if you go through a great struggle to arrive at the answer,
then people will say he is a fool. (Laughs)
So whatever can be done with ease,
if you do it with great difficulty, that’s what it means.
It will pay off. in many ways
it’s not necessary that
in the northern run of the sun, the uttarayana,
this year you’re going to get enlightened - not necessary.
But if you could be one notch above where you are right now, that itself is a great blessing
that itself is a tremendous possibility.
And that possibility is definitely there for those who really give themselves
and learn to ride with the winds,
learn to ride with the natural forces,
which are assisting us in a certain way.
(Sadhguru): we need to understand this
people are coming to conclusions by looking at certain limitations.
For example, you know, the psychiatry and other things
people like Freud, they’ve come to many conclusions about humanity
which are utterly nonsensical.
It is just that because they studied only sick people;
they never got to study a Buddha, isn't it?
They studied only mentally sick people,
with that they're making conclusions about whole humanity,
it’s not so.
Now, if you can create suffering,
you can also create something else, isn't it?
Do you see who you are,
whatever you may think you are right now,
your personality, your identifications, all these things are fine,
but fundamentally
if you're really alert and listening to me,
you cannot sit here as a man or a woman,
you can only sit here as a certain life energy, isn't it?
Yes?
If you're aware,
‘I'm a man,
I'm a woman,’
that means you're not here totally.
do you see your big identities just fall off so easily.
If you don’t pay attention to it, they fall off.
If you get focused on something else, they fall off.
So, people are trying to experience this in many ways
playing a game,
jumping off a mountain,
singing a song,
dancing,
doing this,
falling in love with somebody,
these are all different ways that people are trying to get involved in something to such a point
that they can forget all the other nonsense that they have created.
Yes?
But none of these things can you sustain for 24 hours of the day.
Now, we are exploring a technology where you don’t have to do anything
and still be that way.
Because if a certain state of being is related to a certain activity,
nobody can maintain that activity 24 hours of the day, isn't it?
Any kind of activity.
Whether it is playing or singing or dancing or music or love or meditation,
you cannot manage it for 24 hours of the day,
it's not possible,
not practical, isn't it?
So, that means if you can create something for one moment
so you're able to create a certain sense of freedom from suffering for one moment;
if you create one moment,
can't you create one more moment?
Hum?
Can't you create one more, one more, and one more and one more?
That’s the way you create your life.
Fortunately moments don’t come at you in bunches,
they're coming only one at a time, isn't it? (Laughs)
Are they coming in bunches?
Only one at a time.
If you know how to make this moment blissful, you can live blissfully, isn't it?
Now, suffering,
please look at it and see,
people are capable of suffering just about anything.
Is it so?
People are suffering their well-being,
people are suffering their illness.
People are suffering loneliness,
people are suffering togetherness.
Is it so? (Laughs)
People are suffering poverty,
people are suffering affluence.
Is it so?
People are suffering discomfort,
people are suffering comfort. Is it so?
So, they're capable of suffering every… anything.
So, obviously they are creating suffering.
Yes?
If you look at yourself, this life energy which you call as ‘myself’
sometimes has been very blissful.
Has it been joyful and blissful at certain times?
Sometimes it's been absolute turmoil,
sometimes peaceful,
sometimes agony,
sometimes ecstasy
has it gone through all this?
So, it is capable of finding all these various expressions.
So, if it is capable of all this;
if only if you had little mastery over your life energies,
what would you instruct your life energies to be,
misery or joy?
Joy
So, people who have no control over their systems,
they are talking suffering is inevitable.
No, suffering is not inevitable;
suffering is self created.
If you're aware,
if you take your body into control,
if you just have little mastery over your body
at least 15 to 25-30% of your life and destiny will be in your hands,
please see,
just your body, physical mastery. Is it so?
If you take your mind into your control,
if you have mastery over your mind, at least 40 to 60% of your mind will be
40 to 60% of your life will be in your control.
If you take your life energies into your control,
100% of your destiny will be in your control.
The very way you live and the very way you die will be decided by you.
Questioner: I have been seeing your videos in YouTube,
this is the first time that I am seeing you live.
So, I have a basic questions,
which will help everyone here.
Everyone talks about, you know, knowing ourselves
and the first step is going inside
and then the way to go inside is meditation
and when I try to
Sadhguru: I don’t know, please don’t (Laughs)… do
I never said such things.
I don’t know which everyone said those things (Laughter).
Questioner: Okay, so then how do we go inside?
Vinita Bali: That is the question (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Inside what, you are already inside the hall (Laughter)? Inside what?
Questioner: Inside ourselves.
Sadhguru: Ohh (Laughs)!
Questioner: Okay, if that is the truth of the first step of knowing answers for all the questions,
if going inside is the answer,
then how do we do that?
Sadhguru: First of all, you must understand what is inside, okay,
and what is outside.
If you do not understand what is inside and outside,
then you will go to all the wrong places.
Now what is inside?
Your body – accumulated over a period of time, yes or no?
Hello, Maa?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: What you accumulate can be yours, cannot be you.
Is that much clear?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whatever it may be.
What you accumulate can be yours, cannot be you.
So, this body (Gestures) is an accumulation.
What you call as my mind,
the whole content of the mind is accumulated,
depending upon what you are exposed to in your life.
So your body is a heap of food, small or big.
Your mind is a heap of impressions, again small or big.
Between these two heaps, where the hell are you?
So, inside, outside –
leave these words because
when it comes to language,
there is only that much leeway,
so within that, maybe different people are trying to use it in different ways,
we don’t know in what context they used.
You put everybody into one bundle and said,
“All of you said this.”
I don’t know who these all people are.
Different people employed different methods around them,
looking at the people around them,
what was best suitable for the people around them,
accordingly they would have worked most probably.
If they are genuine,
they would have worked with the people around them,
not with concepts from somewhere.
What… Looking at an individual person, you will do something,
what works for that person.
What you do with this person (Gestures) may not work for another person,
you’ll have to do something else with that person
but you are talking about a generic inward, outward.
So, first determine what is inward, outward.
Everything is outward right now.
The world is outside,
body is also external material,
all the material in the mind also is external
so what is this inward you are talking about?
Then you will immediately say atma, paramatma, soul, this one.
Now you are going into belief system.
You don’t know!
You know you have a body, yes? Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Please check your neighbors (Laughter).
You know you have a body,
you believe you have a mind (Laughter).
But to some extent, you know
but rest is belief. Yes or no?
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Sadhguru: I’m not questioning whether it’s true or false,
let’s not go there at all, but it’s belief,
it’s not yet in your experience.
If you talk about something, which is not yet in your experience,
to put it bluntly
you’re just a bloody liar, that’s what it means.
But because lies are holy,
lies are written in scriptures,
lies are repeated by all kinds of people
who dressed in different ways,
which are supposed be holy though ridiculous.
Because of this, you are not supposed to question these words.
Anywhere you go,
first thing is people say, “Sadhguru, what about the soul?”
I ask them, “Which sole, right or left” Laughter/Applause)?
So, let’s not te… talk about something that is not in your experience.
Right now, your body is in your experience to some extent,
your mind is in your experience to some extent,
rest you don’t know but we can infer.
If I have to …accumulate this much (Gestures) body,
if I have to accumulate this much (Gestures) mind,
something more fundamental must be there,
yes?
Something more fundamental must be there,
we don’t know what the hell it is.
For now, we will call it “you.”
How you will go into yourself,
I’m asking (Laughter)?
You can go into this hall,
you can go out of this hall?
How will you go into yourself, I’m asking?
Tch, saying let’s leave this,
this is not the way.
You do this way.
What is not you, all those things you keep it aside.
Before today… if you… before you go to bed,
everything that’s not you, keep it aside.
They may be precious to you.
You think about it,
your house, is it you?
“Oh! My house” (Gestures) (Laughter).
All right, you have lots of passion about it
but all right, keep it aside.
Your husband, is it you?
No, that’s easy,
“He is not me” (Laughter/Applause).
My children … are they me?
Oh, little difficulty, but no (Laughter), tch,
they are not me.
They’re beginning to tell you –
if they’re twelve, they’ve already told you (Laughter).
So, the clothes that you wear, is that you?
No.
The body that you wear, is that you?
No.
All these thoughts and emotion, is this you? No.
Everything that’s not you, keep it in one heap,
not physically,
just do this mentally. Keep everything aside,
let me see.
Every day, you practice this.
One day, when you successfully keep everything aside that you are not,
what you are will be there (Applause).
We have too many ideas about things that we’ve not seen,
this is a big problem.
Shankaran Pillai went to Britannia (Laughter/Applause).
Can I…?
Vinita Bali: You love the story, yes.
Sadhguru: Shankaran Pillai went to Britannia Industries (Laughter) to find a job,
to find a job.
So, they were looking for a really smart,
farseeing sales manager.
So they asked him one question,
“Which is farther
Mumbai or moon?”
Shankaran Pillai thought,
he said, “Mumbai.”
They said, “What?
Mumbai is farther than the moon?”
He said, “Yes.”
“How?”
“Well, I can see the moon, I can’t see Mumbai” (Laughter and Applause).
So what I am saying is –
if you go by your present perception,
you’ll get all the wrong conclusions.
So don’t be in a rush to make conclusions.
Let’s pay little more attention.
You are a worthwhile life,
which deserves some attention, isn’t it?
Don’t seek other people’s attention (Laughter).
Your own attention,
doesn’t this life (Referring to oneself) deserve attention?
Pay attention to this (Referring to oneself).
Enough attention, everything will be clear.
Everything about you, you’re asking me.
If I tell you, what do you have?
You have some more words. Tch,
some more words you have,
that will not get you anywhere near the truth.
One more word or ten more words doesn’t get you any closer to reality,
just you’ll have more things to say to somebody else.
This kind of hearsay is spreading in the world.
Everybody knows where god is,
who his wife is,
how many children he has,
when is his birthday,
his address.
In every bhajan, people are singing his address,
where he is and how to get him
but they don’t know a damn thing about themselves.
This kind of,
what to say, a very knowledgeable ignorance is dangerous (Laughter), you know?
If you do not know, it’s not a problem.
If I see, “I do not know,”
the possibility of knowing is always there, isn’t it?
If I do not know and I think I know,
then I’ve destroyed all possibilities.
So, we have arrived at many things,
we know
In every culture they know what is the nature of god,
where he resides,
how the ambience is there and the works, you know?
Tch, you
Everybody knows the geography of the heaven, isn’t it?
Don’t you?
but you don’t know a damn thing about yourself.
It’s time,
it’s time we paid attention because
everything you know,
you know it only the way it’s projected in the firmament of your mind.
You don’t know anything any other way.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So, what you need to fix is –
you are seeing everything in a mirror of your mind
and the mirror is wonky.
First fix it,
first thing is to make it stable,
flat,
proper plain mirror,
so that you see everything the way it is.
Does the plain mirror show you everything the way it is?
Everything reverse, you know?
Then you’ll have to flip it,
that’ll take much more skill,
most people can’t flip a dosa (Laughter).
Now to… flip the whole universe,
the whole life that is reflecting in your mind,
to flip it over without shattering it into pieces will take much more.
But the first thing is to level out the mirror
so that it shows you everything the way it is,
not some other way.
Right now, everything is seen depending upon
how you are identified with something.
Every identity has distorted the mirror of your mind
and it shows you things in completely different way than the way it is.
First thing is stop talking about things that you do not know –
no soul, no atman, no paramatman, no god, no divine, no heaven –
talk about something that you know
and then the longing to take the next step will become strong.
Otherwise, when you know the geography of the heaven,
what is the need to pay attention to anything?
(Sadhguru): This sense of no human being should live in an unconsecrated space
is something which is deep-rooted in this culture,
because it is just like if you plant something into this earth,
only if the roots are sticking into a rich earth
will the flower and the fruit come out.
If the earth into which these roots are sticking in are not
is not rich enough,
is not enhanced enough to sustain life,
flower and fruit will not come;
even if it comes it will be too meager,
it will never be a full-blown flowering,
it'll never be a full-blown fruiting of the plant.
So always these aspects we paid enormous
gave enormous importance to these aspects of life.
It’s not just about what you eat,
it's not just about what kind of work you do,
what kind of space you live in,
this is very important in the East.
So people always consecrated their homes in whichever way they know best
and only then moved in.
If the kings were sensible and benevolent they consecrated the whole town,
they created any number of places in the town
so that the whole town is consecrated;
he wants everybody to live in consecrated spaces.
If you walk on the street,
if you do business,
if you live in that town,
every one must constantly live in consecrated space
because if you want to produce generations of enhanced human beings
you need this kind of space,
otherwise only by accident
or by personal dint somebody may become something,
you won’t produce a generation of beautiful people.
This culture produced a galaxy of knowledge,
a galaxy of enlightened beings.
Every generation produced this simply because
they took care of any number of aspects like this.
Nowhere else on this planet
have single generations of people risen to such glorious heights of knowing
as this culture has known,
but all that got fractured in the last few hundred years.
In the last 800 to 900 years this got badly fractured
because of invasions and displacement of people and so many things.
You can produce very great intellects,
very great energy,
as human beings I'm saying –
individual human beings carrying phenomenal sense of energy and intellect and capability
if you create large spaces of consecrated space
large consecrated spaces where the whole generation of people
are in touch with that kind of energy and space.
This fortune almost every family had
because before they moved into homes they did this,
periodically they did something to enhance the house;
this was part of almost every house.
Every household at least once a year conducted the needed rituals and processes
to see that the space in the house is enhanced
a basic understanding or rather an essential understanding of
how to generate a conducive atmosphere for a human being to grow to his full potential.
Participant: Sadhguru, could you please explain to us
the difference between Sadhguru Sannidhi, Linga Bhairavi Yantra and Avighna Yantra
and how do we choose which is suitable for us to bring it home.
Is it based on our limitations or our strengths in terms of practices?
Could you please explain that to us?
Sadhguru: The Bhairavi Yantra is for those who are actively involved with life
and they want to lubricate,
they have many things to do in the world.
They want to do many things in the world.
They want to lubricate their actions with the Grace of the Devi.
People who are actively involved in businesses, careers, family life
one of the main things
which does not allow a human being to find his full potential is friction.
Friction need not necessarily mean that you are getting into a fight with somebody
but when you try to be active in a big way
it builds up around you.
So to be able to keep the friction levels low,
determines how far you will endure.
If the friction increases you will want to stay away from activity
or you get into one big mess.
It does not matter how important a certain goal is for you,
if every day when you step out and try to do something,
friction is coming,
slowly you will develop an aversion to that very dear goal of yours in your life.
Hmm?
Slowly you will become a kind of a renunciate (Laughs)
because you can’t deal with the friction.
Most human beings I would say,
I would say 80% of the human beings have hugely curtailed
the possibility of what they could do in their life
simply because they cannot deal with the friction
that they naturally generate when they get into briskly into activity.
So they curtail their lives and keep it very small and protected.
They think that’s the smart way to deal.
It’s not a very smart way to deal
because instead of bringing lubrication,
you are keeping the engine off.
That’s not a good thing.
If your engine is making funny noises,
what it needs is lubrication,
not to be kept in the garage forever.
Then the very purpose of why it is here is lost.
So Devi and all the forms, different types of yantras available
with regard to Devi is about that,
to bring Grace in such a way that you can take up things and do things
and you still do not get into friction.
Her Grace will take care of that.
We estimated if the homes are anywhere between 2000-2500 sq. ft of home,
we thought the small yantra would do.
When we noticed that the homes are larger than that,
we said this is not enough
and we brought the Avighna.
And Avighna has a slightly more business-like attitude towards it,
more for success and prosperity.
But of course those who want to make use of it for spiritual processes
can also always make use of it.
That element is always the basic element.
The idea is to create an energy form,
to create assistance for people to do whatever they want to do.
Sadhguru: 15000 years ago a yogi appeared in the upper regions of Himalayas.
Nobody knew where he came from,
his antecedence were completely unknown.
So people gathered around him
because he was such a phenomenal presence.
A large group of people gathered like this.
They expected him to say something,
do something –
he did nothing,
he said nothing,
simply he sat.
If I simply sat here for two hours,
I can imagine
within fifteen minutes those people in the last few rows (Gestures) (Laughter),
and they will slowly
“Still there is time for the cinema, let’s go.”
If I said nothing for two hours, ninety percent of the people will be gone.
If I said nothing for six hours,
only a few hardcore ones will hang on,
rest are all gone.
Same happened to him.
He said nothing, did nothing,
simply sat still.
Not for a day,
not for a week,
for months on end he simply sat still.
Everybody was expecting a miracle
nothing happened,
he just sat.
But they were missing a most fundamental miracle
because the nature of your body is such right now,
you are well attended to.
You had lunch in the afternoon and maybe you snacked in the evening,
and so that you don’t fall asleep you had a coffee
and maybe you have something in your bag (Laughs),
so many things.
All these things are being attended to,
so this (Referring to one’s body) is fine.
Suppose we just make you sit here for four hours –
“Sadhguru at least some water?”
“Okay, drink water.”
After drinking water can we just sit here?
“Sadhguru (Gestures as if asking permission to go for peeing)” (Laughter) that one –
“Okay do that and come.”
“Sadhguru (Gestures as if asking permission to eat)” – okay,
if we give this, the next one no permission (Gestures dozing off) (Laughter).
This will just go.
Or in other words what you call as a body is a series of processes.
Only if you’re attending to them, it’s fine.
If you don’t attend to it then you see what a trouble it is.
When you do not attend to the body
if you are hungry or why all that
people say how long one minute is depends on which side of the bathroom door you are.
From inside somebody says “just one minute”,
outside it’s one eon (Laughter), okay?
Because this is the nature of the body-
if you do not attend to it, it’ll become so compulsive
and get you into such big trouble.
But here he just sat,
he neither ate nor drank water nor went to attend to nature’s calls,
simply he sat still.
People could not even make out whether he is alive or dead.
The only sign of life was
off and on tears of ecstasy were dribbling down his cheeks,
otherwise he simply sat unmoving.
Then only seven people hung on.
They realized the miracle of him sitting here like this
because if he has to sit here like this
he has transcended physical nature,
otherwise you cannot sit like this.
These seven people hung on
today we celebrate these seven people as the Sapta Rishis.
These were his first disciples of the Adiyogi (Applause).
So this Adiyogi just sat there,
these seven people showed interest,
he told them, “This is not for you, this is not entertainment”
but they said, “No, we’re willing to do anything.”
He gave them a few preparatory steps,
they prepared for many years.
Then one day when the solstice was shifting
just now we shifted from summer solstice to wi… winter solstice on December 22nd.
It’ll again happen on June 21st and this coming June 21st is significant,
significant for the world
because this is the day when Adiyogi first gave his
turned south and gave his teaching
because the sun turned south, he turned south
and started explaining the mechanics of being human.
On this day fortunately the world...
the United Nations has declared the World Yoga Day
because yoga began on that day (Applause).
This incredible process of exploring the human mechanics went into the process.
This predates all religion
when there was no religion on the planet,
15000 years ago he went into the mechanics of what it means to be human
and various aspects happened.
He opened up one hundred and twelve different ways in which
a human being can attain to his ultimate nature.
And when people asked,
especially his wife Parvati asked,
“Why not more, why only hundred and twelve?”
Then he said,
“If you are rooted in the body, there are only hundred and twelve possibilities.
If you transcend the body how many atoms there are in this universe,
that many doorways are there if you’re willing to explore it.
But if you are rooted in this body, there are only one hundred and twelve ways”
and the whole yogic system subscribes to this even today
because nobody has found more ways.
Any number of yogis have explored in a million different ways
but there is no other doorway.
In this body there are hundred and twelve ways into which you get there.
So for this
how to generate this,
how to make this (Referring to oneself) work the way you want it?
So this whole mechanics he started
Adiyogi explored for many years
and he gave this elaborate knowledge to the world
and then asked these seven people to go in seven different directions in the world.
One went to Central Asia,
another went to North Africa,
another went to sa… South America,
another went to Southeast Asia,
one came down to what we call as the in… Indian part of Himalayas,
one stayed with him,
and one more who is very important for us,
Agastya Muni came down south.
He is known as the father of Southern mysticism
because he did not spare a single human habitation south of the Vindhyas
in the Deccan Plateau he made sure
every single human being who lived in this place had some sense of spiritual process.
Sadhguru: These things were very significantly relevant
when deities were created in a certain way.
When I say deities were created in a certain way
see all this has become one big hotchpotch.
It's become one big hotchpotch,
because
the culture was created understanding
the phenomenal complexity of life
but the instruments and the institutions
which were to transmit this from generation to generation
got seriously disturbed in the last 1800 years
because of invasions and things like that.
Otherwise, this is a very sophisticated science.
Not everybody went to every temple at one time.
There were some temples
which were for general wellbeing, where everybody went.
But for specific purposes,
people went only to their Kula Daivam.
Even today remnants of that are there,
people are going
but the daivam may not be created any more understanding the science.
So why the Kula Daivam is,
today,
even if somebody died a hundred years ago,
they can dig up something and
if they found one tiny little bone,
they can take it,
go to the laboratory,
check the DNA, check your DNA,
and say, ‘This was your grandfather.’
Yes or no?
Even if somebody died ten thousand years ago,
if they find a remnant of something,
today, you can take the mummies in Egypt,
which are over four thousand years old,
you can take the DNA of this mummy
and trace it down to somebody in Egypt,
who is right now protesting on the street,
that this was Tutankhamen’s progeny.
Possible!
Yes?
The science gives you this access.
So similarly we identified
you must understand, this is relevant,
only when everything else was maintained.
You know there is whole lot of struggle going on
in Haryana about the Khap panchayats
saying that these cousin brothers and cousin sisters should not marry,
this is sacrilege.
See,
I do not know whether they’re aware
or why they are protesting.
But if they are truly aware you have to respect it,
they may be just protesting because you’re breaking the norm,
but essentially why this was done is,
they maintained the genetic track way back.
For thousands of years
they maintained the genetic track in their own way.
Never mixing it up,
never doing anything, which will disturb the track,
so that the progeny comes out well.
And not only that,
you can create a certain energy
which travels through the track.
Everybody in your kula need not go to the temple,
you go and pray, everybody benefits,
because all of us are connected.
Right now, this will happen
the future of medical science is this:
that if they find some pure genetic material
when we say a pure line of genetics,
they can do it like this
that they can find something that works for your DNA,
just spray it in the air,
all the people who have that type of DNA will benefit instantly.
Right now they are saying Asians have this kind of DNA
and they are more prone to diabetes.
Americans have this kind of DNA, they are prone to something else,
aren’t they saying this?
So if you just add one supplement into the Asian diet
or into the American diet or into European diet,
you can change the way people live.
This has happened.
These things have happened in United States,
that they have added certain this thing to
as a part of their bread making and everything.
Lot of ailments that they were suffering
in forties and fifties are gone in that country,
because people have that kind of DNA
and they’re being treated in a certain way unknowingly.
Current generation do not even know about it,
but it’s a part of their bread making,
they’re taking in certain things
and certain things are settled.
For example, in fifties United States
has a huge number of cases of diabetes
which India is facing right now.
So D3 as a vitamin, they found,
if you add D3 to those people’s diet,
their diabetes will go away.
They added D3 to the bread making;
there’s hardly any diabetes in United States.
Now it is coming to us.
But we eat D3
it will not work the same way for the Asian genetics.
We need to find something else.
We can tell you what you need to eat.
So they understood this
and they maintained this genetic line so strictly
and they established an energy source.
For this particular DNA,
for this particular kind of genetic trend,
and when they go there,
they are not telling some God up there.
They are just registering,
‘This is me,
I belong to this line,
this is my Gotra,
this is my nakshatra,
this is my kula,’ means,
I am registering my DNA material.
I am saying,
‘This is my DNA, do something to me.’
It is the most scientific way of handling it.
Science gone bad;
technology not transferred properly.
Today it’s all mixed up.
So it will not work the same way.
If they had maintained those genetic lines,
you could make it work like that.
But now you fall in love with the girl next door,
she could be anything.
Your choices have become more important
than maintaining those kind of things,
I mean society has changed.
So those things have become irrelevant.
But when things were maintained like that
it was a very relevant thing,
it was a wonderful understanding of life,
a fabulous understanding of genetics
and how it functions.
Juhi Chawla:. You do certain things for yourself,
certain things,
one - you’re given health
and then how you maintain it is
you eat well, you exercise and you remain healthy.
Now, to be loving when maybe in a household,
any situation,
maybe outside forces are not pleasant –
it doesn’t come easily to then just be loving.
So, what should you do to…?
I mean what is the practice
to become that way
or to train yourself to be that way?
Sadhguru: You believe you need to practice.
Practice means you’re trying to perfet… perfect an action, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: To be loving at all times
Sadhguru: Yes, yes that’s not an act.
Juhi Chawla: No, not an act,
but to be so accepting
Sadhguru: No, I don’t want to… I don’t want to go back to the movies, okay? (Juhi Laughs)
Juhi Chawla: No, to be so accepting because
Sadhguru: No, it’s not about accepting.
Right now, do you want to keep your mind
your thought process pleasant or nasty?
Tell me, what is your choice?
Juhi Chawla: Ideally pleasant.
Sadhguru: Just tell me, pleasant or nasty?
You’re thinking about it,
this is
Juhi Chawla: No, I am trying to think
should I fox you and say nasty (Laughter).
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Say it.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Okay, nasty.
Sadhguru: I’m going to bless you now (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: No, no, no. Okay I take back my words (Applause).
Okay.
All right, so
Sadhguru: Any human being’s choice for themselves is definitely pleasantness, isn't it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: Body, mind, emotion, everything and surroundings –
you want it pleasant.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: So why is it not pleasant?
Surroundings are not pleasant because of many things
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: If your thought and emotion are not pleasant it is entirely you isn't it?
Juhi: Yes
Sadhguru: Surroundings – not entirely me,
it’s so many forces.
We have to manage them, we have to juggle them,
not always are we successful with everything around us.
You know different people have different levels of competence
to manage the outside.
Not all of us have the same… what to say,
the skill to manage the outside.
But inside, your emotion and your thought,
why is it not happening your way?
This is something we have to look at.
This has to be addressed,
every human being has to address this.
At least your thought and your emotion must happen the way you want it.
It’s like this –
on a certain day,
a lady went to sleep.
in her sleep – she had a dream.
in her dream she saw a hunk of a man standing in that corner.
And then he started coming closer and closer and closer.
He came so close she could even feel his breath.
She trembled, not in fear
and then she asked, “What will you do to me?”
The man said, “Well lady, it’s your dream (Laughter).”
Juhi Chawla: Okay.
Sadhguru: I’m saying what’s happening in your mind is your bloody dream.
Now the problem with life is
not that life is not happening the way you want it,
even your dream is not happening the way you want it, that’s the problem (Laughter).
I’m saying at least fix this,
at least let the dream happen the way you want it.
If you were dreaming the way you want right now,
your thought and your emotion would be pleasant, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes, but it… Well
Sadhguru: Fixing the world is another thing, that’s a different game.
That needs lot of skill,
this needs just willingness.
Why we’re continuously talking about
joy, blissfulness, love, is not because
it’s a goal by itself,
these are not goals by itself
only by… when you are pleasant by your own nature,
you stop being in pursuit of happiness.
You are fine by yourself,
you don’t have to go anywhere to feel pleasant.
You don’t have to do anything to feel pleasant,
sitting here you’re feeling very pleasant,
now you will look at life the way it is.
Otherwise, you’re an endless race,
pursuit of your happiness is a lifelong thing.
Till your deathbed you’re pursuing, what does it mean?
That means you’re a failure.
If you’re pursuing happiness when you are five,
I can understand, but that was not the fact,
when you’re five you were simply happy by your own nature.
When you’re fifty, you’re pursuing your happiness -
this is a failed story, isn’t it?
As when you feel your new book, what significance it had for people, who have..
completed an engineering and other programmes?
Oh, you mean decide the failed candidates of an engineering program?
So even when you went to school..
the teachers came and taught you something, you did not get it.
So you went and.. went home and read the textbook. You did not get it.
Examination came and you failed.
Obviously, you did not get it. So then they'll give you a guide book, no?
Like if you cannot see they'll give you a guide dog
Like that if you cannot get it they'll give you a guide book, which is a simpler version
of everything.
If you could get it,
you could read a textbook and find it's not enough and read a reference book,
Which is many more things than what you need for your examination,
but
You're interested in knowing, you're not interested in just getting a little bit.
But if you can't get it, then we give you a guidebook
So this is more like a guidebook
Those who will not get to an engineering or those who got there and didn't get it.
Now said "Guru, I got it". That meant you did not get it.
Because inner engineering is not a one-time thing, it's an ongoing process
This is the nature of the existence
Right now
you may just see the color of the leaves at Fall time
and have romantic ideas coming out of it. But as far as the Earth is concerned it is engineering.
It's future, for the winter.
Because if the leaf doesn't cover the Earth
and when there's no Falls the tree will die.
So.. when the sun was up, it needed leaf up there
when there's no Falls,
it needs leaf down there, and if the foliage is on and if the snow falls the tree will break too.
So.. they're engineering their life continuously, the way it is necessary for them.
So engineering is not like.. one time you did it, and that's it. I've done the program. It's not a qualification.
It is an evolution of the human being.
So..
you have seen.
This is not because of nature of what is being offered to you,
but the nature of how most people make use of it. Have you not noticed
that when you went through the an engineering program, whatever you went through whether the
14 day one or seven day one or five day or four day or two day?
You remember immediately after program, how beautifully it worked - yes or no?
But slowly..
many have gone back to their old positions.
They remember an engineering
as a nice experience in their life
It's been..
from an aspiration in engineering with an aspiration now it is gone into a cherishing mode.
No, in an engineering
is neither an aspiration nor should it be in a cherishing mode, it should be in an ongoing
engineering mode!
That means
constantly engineering this.
The fundamentals are there, but engineering must continue, isn't it?
So.. the book...
is a wonderful reminder
for those of you who found inner engineering worked in a fantastic way for three weeks,
and pretty good for three months.
Six months later just a few things worked and six years later
Shambhavi was such a pleasant memory.
So this book is not something that you read and throw kind of book.
This is something that you use every day to engineer yourself to bring
certain simple aspects
into reality.
The book is not teaching you
how to become something.
The book is only talking about how to position yourself so that life will find its way.
In what posture should you sit right now for these lungs to operate properly?
Is it true that if you lie down on your face your lungs will not operate properly - yes or no?
If you sit up like this, it works better.
This is how the body is engineered, so we have do if you want to breathe well, we sit like this.
Similarly for various aspects of your life there are different positions that you need to take physically,
psychologically,
emotionally, energy-wise for it to blossom.
So these are simple fundamental principles as to how you can hold these different aspects, so that it will blossom.
In an engineering program also is the same thing,
but...
as you have relegated it into cherishing mode
That you cherish those 7 days, it was so nice the program...
Then..
The book will bring back the program and remind you - there is nothing nice about it!
It is just that if you use it, it works, if you don't use it, it doesn't work.
It's just simple.
There's really nothing nice about an engineering, what's nice..
about it? Nothing nice.
In fact, what's nice about me? - nothing nice about me, all the time picking problems out of you.
Just three days ago I asked somebody about something
Did somebody give you feedback on what you're doing, or did they praise you?
They told me: "Whoever praises anybody in Asia?..
All they do is pick on problems".
I said: "That's good,
because..
What you're doing well? Will anyway barefoot?
We don't have to say anything nice about it.
It will enemy barefoot.
What you are not doing well is what needs to be fixed.
And
people who want to be popular with you, but they don't care a damn. Once you're not with them, they will praise you
But if somebody is really concerned about you, they'll pick on all your problems and tell you what it is.
Because that's what needs to be fixed.
What you're doing well anyway will barefoot, isn't it?
That doesn't need praise from me or anybody.
Life will pay you
back for doing things well. What you're not doing well for that life will punish you it's best that those things are fixed at the least.
So the book is just a reminder, daily reminder.
Reminder means..
See, it's.. it's like your alarm bell.
You want to wake up in the alarm - at a certain time, you keep an alarm bell.
"Sadhguru, ten years ago I had set an alarm one day, I woke up on that day".
It's no use.
Today morning, did you wake up? It's a question, isn't it? So is alarm bell a one-time tool in your life or a daily tool?
It's just like that - an engineering is a daily tool,
it's not a one-time thing.
Book
is..
to make that statement very clear to you - an engineering is not a one-time thing, it's a daily thing.
So..
Those who have done the program must carry it with them as a guidebook.
Because you don't have a guide dog, you need a guidebook.
And you should not take it as a teaching. You should just carry it as a toolkit.
Shekhar: You said ‘beyond the physical’,
you said you can perceive
you and the universe
and you did that
almost as ‘me and the universe’ was one,
and the perception of that.
So most of us
can intellectualize the idea of the universe,
we can’t
and we can’t experience it
and between the intellectualization of it and the experience of it
you were telling me that all of Bhairavi and… and… and… and
the windows that are opened,
I am getting closer to the
my relationship with the universe.
Can you describe that
between the intellectualizing and the experiencing of it
and where my relationship exists?
Sadhguru: See, if you go with a foot-scale
to measure the depth of the ocean,
you will invariably come back and tell me
that it’s bottomless,
because it’s impossible for you to measure the depth of the ocean
with a foot-scale.
You’re approaching the universe with a completely wrong instrument –
the intellect.
your intellect itself is an instrument
which can only dissect and know things.
There is no way your intellect can know anything,
perceive anything without dissecting.
Without prior… prior information about it,
you cannot know.
If you see anything new,
there is no way for you to know.
Now, you really want to know your daughter –
would you like to dissect her?
Shekar: No
Sadhguru: (Laughter) That’s definitely not the way.
But with intellect you can only dissect her.
You can
You will call it analysing, but it’s dissection.
So by dissecting,
you can know all kinds of details
but you will not know the real thing.
So whether you take a flower or a human being or a tree or an animal,
by dissection you’re not going to know anything.
You will only know the physical parts of it.
The sum of these physical parts still does not make the whole.
So with a foot-scale you’re trying to measure the depth of the ocean –
you will come with wrong conclusions.
Shekhar: So… I mean, the fundamental question
Sadhguru: So I’m saying keep that aside
and let’s talk without your intellect, let’s be… lets see
Try and make an effort.
Shekhar: All right, I am going to leave my because without intellect there is no question
Sadhguru: No there are questions in the universe without intellect
Shekhar: Let me try,
let me try without my intellect.
Nothingness is not a question
but it is also a question.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Don’t go into abstract thinking.
Shekhar: So I don’t know what to do. If I… Because the moment
Sadhguru: The very human existence right now is a question.
There is a longing to know –
that itself is a question.
Shekhar: Yes.
Sadhguru: But the longing to know is being right now
unfortunately channelized through an instrument
which is incapable of knowing.
So I am saying you have a longing to know,
which is a big question mark by itself –
try to direct this question mark without the use of your intellect.
Don’t sit there and try to dissect me,
you will not get anything.
If you cut me you will only get what you will find in a frog or a goat –
the same heart, liver, kidney.
You will not find enlightenment in my kidneys. (Laughs)
If you want to know this,
you must keep that aside
and still pursue the question.
That’s what she is. (Referring to Bhairavi)
Shekhar Kapur: She is a question without the intellect?
Sadhguru: No, no. I’m saying when you go to her,
you have to go with your heart;
you can’t go with your intellect.
If you go with your intellect, what is there?
One black form like this.
What is this?
It’s nothing.
But you ask people who’ve just walked in,
it just hits them.
It’s an explosion of energy.
But if you go there with your intellect, what is there?
Simply madness.
Shekhar Kapur: So is madness wrong?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) I thought everybody is trying to be sane! (Laughs)
Shekhar Kapur: Okay, so let’s not be sane for a while.
Let’s be mad.
Sadhguru: The thing is
human beings are always
trying to do mildly insane things,
because their sanity is so restrictive.
Their sanity is just crushing them within themselves,
so they want to do something crazy.
They’re not trying to do something crazy –
they’re trying to break the trap of their own intellect.
Intellect thinks logically.
Within the frame of the logic, they feel trapped,
but they don’t understand it is they who are building the trap.
Even a spider has the intelligence to build a trap for somebody else, not for himself. (Laughter)
Shekhar: Right.
Sadhguru: Human beings using their fine instrument of an intellect
and building a trap for themselves
and they feel trapped in that logic,
now they want to do something crazy.
Essentially crazy means something illogical,
something that does not synchronize with the intellectual process.
Every time they do that,
either through drug, a drink or some other mad act that they do,
they’re crossing the line of their logic and they think it’s great.
I’m saying let’s do it, consciously.
You don’t have to do any insane risky thing;
you can sit here and live that.
I am saying someone who builds a trap for himself of his own logic,
he is truly insane but he thinks he is sane.
Your very concept of sanity has to change.
Sadhguru: Stop using your DB.
Don’t use your deep being (Laughs),
don’t try to connect
because with all these things you will go into hallucinatory states of mind.
Then Sadhguru will start talking to you
and things will happen and
don’t get into that.
So what should I do?
If I have to be receptive what should I do?
What is it that is blocking one’s receptivity?
It is just that if you coat anything with too many things,
it can't feel it, isn't it?
Right now you’re too much of a gathering
too much of a gathering.
Too many things have been gathered which you call as myself –
starting from your physical body;
at least though there is considerable room to expand,
physical body has some limitations.
You cannot expand beyond
you cannot gather beyond a point at least.
If you gather too much, collection time will come soon.
Yes?
At least physical body there is a limitation,
but with the mental structure you can gather phenomenally,
and when carrying such a heap on your head
you won't feel anything,
especially if you start believing
the heap that you’re carrying is yourself.
The less you become,
the more receptive you become.
The more you become,
the less receptive you become.
Or in other words, to put it very bluntly,
you’re too full of yourself.
If you reduce that, how can you not feel?
You will have to feel.
What should I feel, should I hear your voice?
Please don’t;
if you want to hear my voice, put on a CD or something.
If you’re hearing voices, then you need treatment.
This is not about hearing voices.
What is being put into you in the form of initiation is a live process.
If you are not too full of yourself,
if you sit here
it will constantly reverberate within you;
always.
So once there is a living energy within you,
all you have to do is clear the space for it.
If you clear the space, you cannot miss it.
If you want sunlight to come in, you don’t have to do any big fighting,
just have to open the window, isn't it?
So, just look at yourself and see –
you may be a very smart man or you may be a very strong man or a very handsome man,
very something –
please reduce that,
you will see, you’ll start feeling. (Laughs)
Yes.
Or you are a very good man,
please reduce that.
Good people can't feel anything, they become like goats
because they keep on thinking, ‘I am good, I am good.’
How?
‘He is not okay, she’s not okay, he’s not okay, he’s not okay, she’s not okay, he’s not okay,
compared to all these people I’m such a good man.’
You’re too full of yourself.
People who think they are good, they’re too full of themselves.
Isn't it so?
Reduce that.
Just understand your place in the existence;
you are like a speck of dust.
Tomorrow morning if you are blown away, I don’t mean the bomb,
I mean, I am sorry (Laughs);
suppose you just disappear tomorrow morning,
everything is going to be fine in this world.
Do you know this?
Oh, can I talk about diamonds?
Diamonds
do you know that ultraviolet light can evaporate a diamond,
do you know this?
‘Diamonds are forever,’
you’ve heard the
Diamonds are not forever.
Just light falling upon it, it can just evaporate.
Please touch and see,
is it still there, those… gone?
Just ultraviolet rays touching it in a certain intensity,
diamond will just evaporate.
So that is all it is,
it is not a big thing -
who you are, you can just evaporate with the right level of awareness.
It doesn’t take any big fighting to do.
There’s no big fight to do.
Big fight is done because you’re fighting with a crowbar.
With a hammer if you try to break diamond,
it's a lot of effort.
Light… just ultraviolet rays can just evaporate;
it will just disappear into thin air
diamond!
So this is very simple,
just bring the kind of awareness to
You do one thing –
when you get up in the morning,
what do you do first thing?
What do you do?
What do you do?
What do you do the first thing in the morning?
Questioner: Phone.
Sadhguru: Phone ....... any messages?....(Laughter/Applause)
You do one thing - you get up in the morning and smile.
At whom?
Nobody.
Smile is not about somebody,
smile happens when this one (Gestures) is feeling in a certain way, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Unless you are a trained PR person,
you learnt to (Gestures) (Laughter) kind of thing,
otherwise smile happens because something is happening within you,
not because somebody has come in front of you, isn't it?
So first thing in the morning you smile.
It takes twenty seconds.
Okay?
If you can't smile at somebody who is next to you, just smile. (Gestures) (Laughter)
Pleasant way to start your day, isn't it?
And if one dose per day is not enough for you,
you’re a chronic patient (Laughter)
every hour, ‘Oh, it's 11 o’ clock?
It's 11 o’ clock,
you know, 21st July 2011 – 11 o’ clock -
how many times has it happened?
How many times has it happened?
Never before,
how many times more?
Never again.
Phenomenal moment, isn't it?
11 o’ clock (Laughter),
11 o’ clock, it’s a simple thing?
You’re taking the biggest things in the existence for granted, do you understand?
It is 11 o’ clock, is it a small thing?
Is it a small thing?
Fantastic,
only once.
Only once in eternity, isn't it fantastic?
Oh 11 o’ clock,
crash course.
Just do this every hour;
you will see in two weeks’ time how you will be.
Hmm?
Twenty seconds crash course you can give yourself.
Yes or no?
Just do that;
you will receive.
(Sadhguru): So spiritual process means just that’s all. We are on fast-forward,
not that we have anything against mangoes or coconuts,
we’re just on fast-forward so we can’t be plucking this and that.
So here, the moon is on fast-forward today.
All the twenty-eight days,
all the twenty-eight faces of the moon,
you see right here.
Everything that happens in a month,
in a subtle way is happening right here.
When such a fast-forward is happening,
many things are changing.
One thing that you will notice is,
that the food...
When I say food don’t hang your tongue out. (Laughter)
No,
when I say food I mean your body.
We’re inviting some tigers today.
They look at you and think, ‘Food!’ Isn’t it?
Food means your body.
Food is your body in making, isn’t it?
Food is your body.
So when I say food, the food,
particularly the cooked food will go through
the phases of its deterioration much, much more rapidly in a subtle way
than it does on a normal day.
We thought we’ll do a little experiment.
(Talks aside - Do we have food?)
We’re going to bring some food, don’t hang your tongues out.
This is not for eating,
this is just to show you how quickly it’s going bad right here, as we sit.
So, everything is going through a certain phase.
If you are not already aware of this...
This is not just happening to the food,
this is happening to your body,
this is happening to the whole world in a certain way.
If... If there is food in your body,
it would happen to you much more,
that is in two hours’ time your energies will age by approximately twenty-eight days.
That means twenty-seven days less of life span could happen to you,
energy wise in a subtle way.
We’ll... We’ll keep watching this as it goes by. (Checks the sambar with rudraksh mala)
See right now, it’s still okay.
You watch this in the next one-and-a-half hours.
You will see things will change about this food, as we sit here. Okay?
We will leave it now, it’ll mature. (Laughs)
So the reason why so many things are taken care of
on a full lunar eclipse day is
because you’re passing twenty-eight days, in two hours’ time,
approximately two hours’ time.
So today is a special day because of the alignment that happens,
certain things happen in the planet,
where anything which we...
anything that moves away from its natural condition
will naturally deteriorate very, very fast on this day.
We have not really conducted an experiment like this
but I can say it with fair amount of confidence that,
suppose we measure how quickly a dead body deteriorates,
on this day it’ll be much faster than other days.
Somebody should experiment on this.
If anybody is working in a pathology laboratory,
you should try this out and see.
But I can show this to you with reference to food...
cooked food, because this is like a dead body.
In the sense it has moved away from its natural condition.
How it was when it was in its natural condition,
how it is now, it has moved away.
We can still eat it, it still nourishes us... us,
even though it’s dead. It still nourishes us
but...
(Checks the sambar with rudraksh mala)
See how quiet it has become now,
not very enthusiastic. (Refers to meter)
First time we held it, it was clearly going this way (Means rudraksh moving in clockwise direction);
right now it is simply...
it’s... it is still not totally tamas.
It is moving there, it’s almost there,
you will see in another fifteen - twenty minutes, if we check it,
it’ll be going anticlockwise.
By the time you see the...
a tiny piece of moon, you will see actively it’ll be going this way.
(Means rudraksh moving in anticlockwise direction)
So if this was in your stomach right now,
seven o’clock if you had your dinner and you were sitting here,
this would be happening within you.
So I thought it’s better it happens outside
than within you,
because food will rot in the stomach.
If we go by the physical sciences,
if we examine you by the limitations of physical sciences,
on one level you are just heart, liver, kidney, lungs and whatever.
We know today they are all replaceable.
Are you replaceable? (Laughs)
Let's see what’s happening to the sambar. (Laughter)
It’s important, isn’t it?
You see this?
Are you able to see this?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Actively going negative. (Rudraskh is turning anti-clockwise)
See we told you not to eat.
Those people in Delhi who are eating today (Laughter),
what to do with them? (Laughs)
This is going through a whole phase.
What would happen in twenty-eight days,
in a subtle way,
in a energy...
on the level of energy, it is happening in these two hours’ time.
(Talks aside - How many minutes totally? Hundred? Hundred and thirty minutes? What is it? The eclipse? Hmm?)
Fifty minutes
so fifty... fifty or full, totally about two hours right?
Almost... Close to three hours of time.
In these three hours what happens in twenty-eight days is happening right here.
It is happening to your body right now as you sit here.
You should be able to notice it but you are not able to notice it
so the sambar is telling you,
what your brain is not able to tell you.
In three hours time
or less than...
this is only we are watching it only for less than forty minutes,
in an hour’s time, what is nourishing food is turning into poison.
That’s what is happening, right here.
If you eat this what will happen?
‘Will I die?’
Unfortunately you don’t. (Laughter)
Why I am saying unfortunately is,
if... if you eat this,
if you immediately fall dead, they would have passed a law, ‘
On an eclipse day nobody should eat the cooked food.’
But because it’s subtle
Sadhguru: Human mind,
because it wants to fix one thing,
it invents too many things.
Because one fundamental ingredient is missing,
instead of getting to it,
it tries to invent so many things.
Various types of moralities,
various ideas of virtue and sin
all these things have been invented by human mind
just to fill that one slot
which has not been filled, that is
to be in connection with the Divine
which is throbbing within us.
Because that one thing is missing,
we are trying to make it up with so many things.
What is virtue,
what is sin,
if you go about debating,
I’m sure each individual have his own sense of
what is virtue and what is sin,
of course according to his convenience, you know.
All this is just a circus
that the mind is doing, simply because
the conscious contact
with that which is the basis of who you are
has not been established,
because to cover that one
lacking
we’ve invented so many things.
On a Sunday morning,
in a sunday school
the Sunday School teacher was very enthusiastic
and
he wanted the little tiny tots who were before him
to get something that day.
So he was talking about virtue.
And then he said,
‘Today, as I was coming to the church
I saw two people beating up a donkey very badly;
I went and saved this donkey from the beating.
What virtue is that?’
So a little boy in the back row
stood up and said,
‘Brotherly love.’ (Laughter)
So your ideas of virtue can always be twisted and turned
in so many different ways
from generation to generation.
Ideas of morality,
ideas of virtue and sin are twisting and turning, isn’t it?
Whichever way it is convenient for today,
accordingly we’ll twist it,
and always there’s a debate as to
which is virtue and which is sin.
From society to society,
from generation to generation,
from individual to individual -
within the house if there are four people,
four people have four different standards of virtue, isn’t it so?
No?
All this, just a cover up job.
To being
Being moralistic means,
to be in morality means
you are in pretention of spirituality.
What should have naturally occurred,
you’re trying to act it out.
If you were a flower that blossomed,
fragrance would naturally come,
because you’re a plastic flower
now, you’re trying to spray.
You spray today
in an hour’s time, again it’s gone.
Morality is a big circus;
with great difficulty
people are being moral, isn’t it?
No?
With great difficulty
and those of them who are successful in being moralistic,
those people who are one hundred percent correct in their morals,
one thing that’s happening with them is
nobody wants to be around them.
They don’t mind being around somebody who’s immoral,
but they want somebody lively, isn’t it?
Totally moral and lifeless,
nobody wants to be with them.
Please see,
the more an individual person thinks
that he is a good person,
‘I’m good, I’m good, I’m good,’
nobody wants to be with him,
because this idea of what is morality,
what is virtue,
what is sin,
is essentially coming in comparison with somebody else.
How do I come to a conclusion that
I’m a good man?
He is not okay,
yes?
Not okay.
She’s not okay,
he’s not okay, she’s not okay, he’s not okay,
he’s not okay, he’s not okay,
compared to all these people I’m a good man.
If I do not make any judgments about any of these people,
then there is no basis for me
to call myself a good man or a bad man.
The more good you think you are,
the more you will find, nobody is okay.
Have you noticed this?
People who think they are very good,
in their eyes nobody is okay.
If nobody is okay, it’s not a question of virtue,
it is a question of madness.
The first sign of psychological disorder is
you start thinking nobody is okay.
Do you know this?
Even medically,
the first sign of psychological disorder,
you start thinking nobody is okay.
Some American author said this, I forget his name.
He said,
‘Everybody in this world is queer except you and me.
You also seem to be little queer.’ (Laughter).
So nobody is okay, except you.
If nobody is okay it is a clear case of madness,
it is not a question of morality or virtue.
So virtue is not about practicing a certain morality;
the greatest virtue is that
you are in tune with life,
you have become life.
Am I not life?
No.
You become too much mind,
you become too much emotion,
you are not life.
And when I say you become too much mind,
the content of your mind is not yours.
If you carefully watch your mind
you will see your father is sitting here,
your mother is sitting there,
your teacher here,
your friend somewhere else,
your enemy somewhere else,
just a whole crowd of people sitting inside and doing crazy things.
Yes?
When such a crowd of people are there,
there is no question of consciousness.
A crowd cannot be conscious.
Only an individual human being can be conscious.
If you carry a crowd of people in your head,
the chances of you being conscious
are super remote.
So the whole process,
the spiritual process is about shifting
from being a mental activity
to being a life process.
Are you alive with a mind?
Are you a mind with life attached?
Let’s decide this.
Ah?
Are you a life with some mental capabilities
or are you a mind with a little bit of life attached?
You’re a life, isn’t it?
A very enthusiastic biology teacher saw a very
unenthusiastic classroom full of children,
so he wanted to do something.
So he went stood on his head in the class on top of the table.
And, he stood there like this on top of his head,
and children got interested and they were all looking.
Then he said, staying on his head,
‘Can you see my face is getting all red?’
They said, ‘Yes.’
Then he got off and then he said,
‘See, when I stand on my head,
my… all the blood moves into my head region
and my face gets red.
But when I stand on my feet it does not happen, why?’
Why… one little boy stood up and said,
‘Because feet ain’t empty.’ (Laughter)
If you perceive things wrongly, upside down,
you could be in deep trouble.
I want you to understand, life can get poisoned
simply because you have a wrong thought
or a wrong emotion
or a wrong idea
or a wrong philosophy for yourself.
So how do you know a particular thought is wrong or right?
How do you know a particular philosophy is wrong or right?
You do not know.
The only way to find out
whether something is poisonous enough or not is
to drink it and see,
after that we will know,
you will not know. (Laughter)
Yes,
we will know it works,
you will not know.
So what works and what doesn’t work,
if you find out like this it’s going to be very expensive.
The best thing is to allow the intelligence of the life to function,
not taking inputs from too many people
and too many things.
This life is it a complete life by itself?
Or is it a half a life?
What do you think?
Ah?
Is it a complete life?
Is it a complete life?
Yes.
But all the priests, pundits, teachers believe
it is not a complete life.
They think they have to fix you.
The moment a child is born,
everybody is trying to tell him
what is good and what is bad
because somewhere they believe,
essentially all children are born bad
or they believe Creator has made a mistake
and they’re gonna fix it.
You think Crearor
Creator has made a mistake with you?
You think Creator has made a mistake with you
and you need to fix it?
No.
You just have to become the way he intended, that’s all.
If you allow this life to function just the way he intended,
everything is fine with this.
Now you’ve gotten twisted out,
as your society expects you
or your own some stupid philosophy that you gathered from somebody.
Just to throb here as life
Oh is it enough if am just here as life?
I may become immoral,
I may kill this person,
I may rob this person
I may ha… do harm to this person.
Yes,
if you sit here just as a body it is very much possible.
The moment you get hungry
you may pounce on the person next to you and start eating him or her.
Possible,
if you sit here just as a body, it is possible.
If you sit here just as a mind it is very much possible
depending upon what kind of content you have taken into your mind,
accordingly you may do so many things.
But if you sit here and reverberate as just life,
the question of harming another life
will never occur to you.
Nobody has to tell you, do not harm,
do not do this,
do not do that.
Only if you’re here as a body or as a mind,
then somebody has to tell you don’t pounce on somebody.
If you’re here as a piece of life,
if you throb as life,
you will see you will not need any morality,
you will not need any teaching,
you will not any need virtues, input into you… input into you.
If you sit here, you’re perfectly fine.
What this life has to do, you will anyway do,
what it… should not do, you will anyway not do.
And if you reverberate this …as a piece of life,
you will clearly know
that your life is not individual.
It is connected with everything in the universe.
There is no way you can miss that point.
Only if you’re too engaged in your head
or too involved in your body
you will be a separate happening.
If your involvement is with the life process,
not with the physical process,
not with the psychological process,
if you’re not identified too much with the physical process
and the psychological process,
if you’re simply sitting here as a life process,
you cannot miss the point that
there are no borders for your life process.
It is happening from everywhere.
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji, I want to say,
I have attended your Inner Engineering program,
I have seen some DVDs,
I have read your books.
And everywhere there are
your brilliant views on various issues.
It could be from the making of a nation to the making of a toy car,
from the running of a household to the running of parliament.
You have brilliant views on every issue that one can ever question.
Yet I know very little about you
and it
You know here’s a brilliant mind with an
for lack of better words,
I would say ‘out-of-the-Box’ thinking
so different, so refreshing, so enlightening.
I am fascinated and I want to know about your life.
And I’d like to know that
I mean, were you just born brilliant (Laughter)?
Did it begin from that very moment?
Sadhguru: I… I… I was a normal birth.
I didn’t come in a box (Laughter).
My mother had a normal child.
Juhi Chawla: No, I’m really fascinated, intrigued that we’re all here
but you know,
the way you think,
we wait to hear what you have to say.
We’ve all been little children and we’ve all grown up
but we’ve grown up and been educated in schools and
but I find our way of thinking,
our way of being very conditioned, like almost systematized.
Whereas, so where…where did it all begin?
Sadhguru: So, what is
I mean the question that you’re asking is,
do people grow up and blossom
or are they brought up by somebody?
You will see the general expression is,
“I was brought up in this place, I was brought up in that way.”
Especially in the West, you will see,
“I was brought up Christian”,
“I was brought up Jewish” –
these are very common words.
I think it’s absolutely ridiculous and humiliating
that a human being has to be brought up.
You bring up cattle, okay?
You don’t bring up a human being.
A human being is supposed to blossom by his own nature.
That is why he’s on the top of the pile, at least on this planet, in the evolutionary scale.
And most human beings don’t seem to understand that
or they are not allowed to understand that by a whole lot of people
and they need to be brought up.
Bringing up means somebody is molding you.
Molding means it’s a predetermined shape.
And no flower that blossoms is the same way as another one,
which blossomed yesterday.
But a mold means it’s always going to be the same.
If you make a mold,
the idea of making a mold is that we want to have the same form,
again and again and again.
Right now, generally that seems to be the work
unfortunately of the current education system,
the so-called religions that are operating in the world
and of course the family.
They want you to be in a certain mold,
they don’t want you to blossom like a wild flower
because they’re afraid of anything fresh happening among them.
They want something that is familiar.
They don’t want something unfamiliar to be born among them.
So, if you have succumbed to that system,
then yes, you’ve been molded into a certain form.
If you allow your humanity to blossom,
then you will see, you don’t belong to any mold.
This is the beauty of being human
that there is no a particular way to be.
If you were a dog you would be one way,
if you were cattle you would be one way,
if you were a sheep you would be another way,
if you’re bird - another way,
a grass… a grasshopper - another way.
But to be human means there is no particular way.
What is human is not defined, nor described,
it is… it is just that
for every other creature on this planet,
nature drew two lines; within that they have to play their game.
For a human being, only the bottom line is drawn,
there is no top line.
But socially, people are trying to draw a top line for themselves.
But nature has not drawn a top line for you,
it’s a limitless possibility
and this is what is freaking human beings right now.
Because they can’t decide what they can (Laughs)… need to be.
They’re trying to be like somebody else.
Only bottom line is set,
top line has been removed – this is evolution.
Juhi Chawla: But wait, we still didn’t quite get to
So, having said all that,
we’ve
I still didn’t quite get it that
So how was it when you were a child,
were you… were you put into a school to go the systematic way where you learnt your Maths and Hindi
sorry, Maths and language and
you know and did you keep up with it
Sadhguru: Do I… Do I look that edu… educated?
Don’t insult me like that (Laughter).
Actually you know, when I go and stand in the line
in the immigration lines, in particularly in America,
they look at me and say, “Can you speak English?”
I say (Nods his head affirmatively) (Laughter)
because I have that uneducated look, it’s not easy (Laughter).
Do you know
Do you know what it takes to remain uneducated?
Education is just twenty years of going somewhere and getting one certificate.
To remain uneducated, it’s very difficult
because from the day you’re born,
your parents, every other adult, the school, the damn thing
everybody is trying to educate you
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: …about something that’s not worked in their life (Laughter & Applause).
Juhi Chawla: And then did you also, like we all went through these confused teenage years
of not really knowing where we’re going,
I mean did you clearly know your path?
Sadhguru: Not at all.
I was, right from three or four years of age,
I was always a million questions hanging in… in my head.
I have (had?) a question about everything -
everything to everything.
Questions means, very fundamental questions about existence itself,
my own existence.
So, when I was three, four years of age,
suddenly I realized I know nothing.
Know nothing means
somebody gives me a glass of water, I do not know what is water.
I know how to use it,
I know if I drink it, it will quench my thirst and so many other ways of using it
but I do not know what is water.
I’m saying even today, you do not know what is water.
It’s the only thing available in all three states on the planet.
Three… two thirds of the planet is water,
two thirds of your body is water.
If we think life, we think water.
But do you know what it is?
With all the scientific exploration,
we do not even know a single atom in its entirety.
Today, our idea of science is,
learning how to use everything.
Yes? We know how to use an atom,
we know how to break it, we know how to fuse it
but we really do not know what it is.
Any one thing, tiniest thing in the creation,
we do not know in its entirety, this is the fact of life.
Juhi Chawla: Well even something simple as what you started with,
saying that looking at water.
I mean, straight away I was taught water - H2O
and what it can do and it… you can mix it with colors and it becomes that.
You can drink it and it quenches your thirst.
But I never looked at it and said you know,
“I don’t really know what is water.”
Sadhguru: Because nobody looks at anything.
See, everybody is looking like this,
nobody has any attention for a piece of life here.
They’re like this (Gestures).
If you pay attention to one life,
one blade of grass,
one grasshopper,
one human being,
something else will happen.
That’s why we said ‘life and love’
because if you pay attention to one human being,
some love will happen within you, okay?
If you miss life, at least some emotion in that direction must happen to you.
That will happen only if you pay attention to one.
If you’re looking at like this (Gestures)
These days it’s become a fashion because you’re in love on Facebook.
You love the whole humanity.
To love one human being
if you want to love one human being, it costs life.
To love the whole humanity, it doesn’t cost anything.
It’s even better to love God because
it’s always easy to love somebody who is not here now (Juhi Laughs),
it’s so easy.
But if you have to love somebody who is sitting next to you right now,
it costs life.
You know how difficult it is to love someone who is next to you right now,
how easy it is to love someone who is dead or who is in heaven? Isn’t it so?
Let’s face it.
Because if you have to love one,
one thing is you have to pay attention.
Without attention, it will not happen.
And above all, you have to give up something that is you, to accommodate another,
otherwise it will not happen.
The English expression, it’s very good – “You must fall in love.”
You cannot rise in love,
you cannot stand in love,
you cannot fly in love,
you have to fall.
Something of you should fall,
otherwise it will not work. You will not know it.
So, you want to have a fake sense of life,
then you don’t pay attention to anything,
everything is information.
Nothing is a living experience.
(Sadhguru): What being on the path of the Divine means is that
you don’t have your own nonsense anymore.
Where does your nonsense come from?
A bit from your parents,
a bit from the society in which you live,
rest you cook it up.
Yes?
Yes or no?
Bit from your genetics,
a bit from the external impressions;
using these two things you cook up the rest.
What comes from external situations is all too much fragmented
bits and pieces.
Maybe this information is useful for your survival- it is!
What comes from your genes
You know Charles Darwin told you were a monkey.
So if you say,
‘My genetics decide who I am,’
the monkey business
the monkey business will not end ever, ’
cause even now,
your DNA is only 1.23 percent different from that of a chimpanzee.
Your evolution is only that much.
So, the more you depend on your genetics,
the more of a monkey you become.
I say a monkey
because if you go by your genetics you become cyclical.
If you travel like this,
one moment if you’re not alert you will go off at a tangent.
If you go like this you may slow down,
you may hasten,
you don’t go anywhere.
So being on the path of Divine means,
first thing to become free from your genetics.
It is in this context,
we say Shiva is swayambhu
that means he has no parentage.
He dropped it.
He cleaned his mother and father out of him.
No father, no mother,
just him,
because genetics means repetition.
Repetition means cyclical nature,
cyclical nature means you’re going in circles,
you’re not going anywhere.
So this ‘I’ business and all
you’re reading bits and pieces of Vedanta.
Please stop that.
Don’t read all this stuff
me and my consciousness and my witness and
where is the witness witnessing the witness?
witness… witness… witness… witness… witness
you can go on endlessly.
Witness witnesses the witness, and witness witnesses witness witness,
witness, witnesses witness witness witness.
This is just a mental game.
Ignorant people acting like they know,
this is what happens.
Philosophies will flourish.
Philosophies
The more philosophical a society is
or the more philosophical a human being is,
the more he is clearly declaring to the world
that he is a pretender-
what he does not know, he acts like he knows.
Simple practical people they know they don’t know,
and they’re proud that they don’t know.
That’s the problem,
but at least they know that they do not know.
So do not get into this trap of intellectualizing the Existence.
Very confidently you use this word ‘Existence’,
but do you know what is Existence?
Does anybody know what is Existence?
Does anybody know?
Nobody knows
So if enlightenment happens, how do we know it has happened? Suppose, we are hallucinating to be enlightened
if such a thing happens
It will be clearer than daylight
It's not something that you can miss
It is not that kind of an event that you could miss it
You will not miss it
but when I say this there is a problem attached to this because these days it is going on in many places
for a certain fee
Within a weekend's time you can get enlightened you will be declared enlightened by somebody
There you see
It's happening everywhere
if you just pay a certain amount of money one weekend, you can get enlightened
I remember in the 60s in the 1960s
In California, people set up certain businesses
enlightenment services
The advertisement I remember very well if you go to Indiana, it will take 12 years of hardship
Okay, [fifty] [dollars] [Thirty] minutes. You [can] get enlightened
They were just using psychedelic machines
You put [upsetting] visuals and certain sounds you just blow your mind apart
Because of the sounds and the visuals when you come out you come in and days
You feel like you have really gotten somewhere
This used to be the advertisement
fifty Dollars Thirty minutes if you go to India Twelve years of hardship
Here is California quite new Technology
This 1960 machines this old technology has now infiltrated into India
Some people have installed these machines, and they are claiming within a weekend. They can enlighten you
you cannot have a sonnet [about] it if you're sincere, you would know that it is not, so
but
If it's a part of the race that you want to get enlightened before somebody of course [you] can declare an in light?
It is just that
this kind of
Deceptions are not new on the planet they have been happening for a long time
but now modern technology [has] come to aid them better to
[give] them
an expanded sense of many things
Much experimentation was done during the 60s and 70s about these things
One is with the pSychedelic machines another is it psychedelic drugs?
You take an LSD and people claim. They're enlightened because they had an expanded sense
Just for a while, and then they came back
If they overdid it
Then they lost everything they cracked up in so many ways or even died
Many many people mentally cracked up because of excessive use of psychedelic drugs
But for those few moments. They really felt enlightened
or at least they thought so
This is not something that you do
This is not something that you can do
It is just that if you cultivate the system
your body
mind
Emotion and energy to its peak possibility
then an absolutely wonderful flower blossoms within [you]
Not something that you did
You just waited with the right kind of conditions. It happened
There's a very beautiful [story] in the yogurt law
On a certain day
Four men were walking in the forest
These four men were walking in the forest
One is Adnan Yogi another is a Bhakti yogi
Another is a karma yogi and the [last] one is a [Kriya] yoga
These four people can never stay together
They cannot be together
because
ag Nana Yogi means yoga of intelligence
He's a man of intellect great intellect
He has complete disdain for everybody. He thinks everybody is a fool
Especially this Bhakti yogi, so doing rah-rah or whatever in his mind they look like after idiots
He can't stand that
Isn't it breathing?
Could that man stamp but theories no he wouldn't stand back. He just can't [dominate] them
but the Yogi's
people have devotion
They have pity for everybody
Thinkers and God [himself] is here you're doing all [this] Mendel's our girls in physical [circles]
is just stupid isn't it just hold God's hand and walk into heaven, so
[buck] theories have pity [for] everybody for [all] the foolishness of their dual
Karma Yogi's think all these other people are just lazy people
Because if you want something to happen you have to do it
Because they are lazy and unwilling to do what they need to do they have invented all these other yoga's
Because in the world if anything has [to] happen, you [must] do it right action
These are yoga of action Karana
create ease have a disdain for everybody because
After all the whole existence is energy unless you transform the energy. How will anything change. Where is a possibility?
So these four people can never be together, but today they were walking together
suddenly a thunderstorm broke loose a rainstorm rain started lashing
From every side they started running looking for shelter
The Bhakti Yogi said there is an ancient temple in this direction. [let's] go there for shelter
He always knows the geography of ten
You won't miss a single temple?
So they are trusted him and ran in the direction
Then they found an ancient temple where the walls had collapsed long ago
Just a [few] columns and a roof was there and in the center
there was a
Dainty God's image
They ran into this place not because they were seeking guard
Not in any kind of love for God just to escape the rain
they ran and
Then they stood there for a while then they found the rain started lies lashing from every Direction
Wherever they stood or sad the rain was getting at them. So the only place where they could sit was around the deity
so all four of them just hugged the deity and sat
Not because they have fallen in love with God simply desk at the rain
Suddenly God appeared
In all [therefore] mines the same question why now?
We did so much yoga
We did so much pooja worship and so many things you didn't come then
Now when we just skipping the rain why not?
And God said at last you for Indians got together
Without these four things getting together within you
Your head your heart your hands and your energy unless it all falls into place
unless all of it reaches its peak
It will not happen and if it happens is there any chance that I may not notice it
There is no such thing even if you are blind [you] [know] the sun has come up, isn't it?
Yes
Even if [you] [are] blind you still know the sun has come up because nobody can miss it
It is not a small event that anybody can miss
You may not know whether you're bBoth will happen many times this will happen only onceorn or not born, but if you get enlightened you will know
It's much bigger than that

you
(Questioner): Sadhguru, I’m having a hard time with devotion
and I’ve been reading everything I can find about things you’ve said
and driving everyone around here crazy asking all of them,
‘What’s devotion?
What’s devotion?’
I am hoping that you can explain it to me in a way that I understand
(Sadhguru): You want to understand devotion or you want to know devotion?
Hmm?
You want to know devotion.
You want to know devotion, it’s one thing;
understanding devotion is an academic thing.
Devotion means that which is devoid of you.
It’s a different dimension of intelligence,
where your intelligence has flowered to a point you understand
If you’ve strived hard enough in your life,
you understand this body, this brain,
this one can do only this much,
but there is something here which is much larger than this one
If you understand this,
you will not make more and more out of yourself.
You will make less and less out of yourself.
When you become nothing, you’re naturally devout.
Devotion means you allow the Existence to flow through you,
you allow the Grace of the Existence to flow through you.
Intellect means
you will divide everything into a million pieces and
you believe you have understood.
So, don’t go about trying to understand.
Do you
You know that last leaf, that leaf
which only came up two days ago?
Do you understand this leaf?
Do you?
Hmm?
Do you?
Why you’re not science graduate?
You study all the goddamn biology that’s there on this planet,
you will still not know what it is.
An ant which is crawling right now in front of you,
do you understand this ant?
Do you understand this ant fully?
No.
Do you understand a single atom in this Existence?
Even a subatomic particle, do you fully understand?
So when you realize everything is here is beyond you.
An ant, the way it is made,
the mechanics of the ant,
just see those eight legs how efficiently they’re walking without getting tangled up.
Just the mechanical part of it, you’re not able to understand.
Leave the other aspects of it.
So if you see, everything is beyond your understanding here
from a leaf to an atom to an ant to an atom to a subatomic particle,
everything is just beyond your understanding.
Would it be not natural for you to bow down to everything that you see?
You think you’ve got it?
So now you have to… trying to understand devotion.
You cannot understand anything
but you can experience everything if you’re willing and open.
Devotion means you’re an absolutely open doorway to life.
A devotee
Once you identify yourself with your intellect,
immediately devotion looks like a stupid thing.
Of course lot of devotees are stupid,
or lot of stupid people claim they are devotees
Lot of idiots on the planet,
who are full of fear,
claim they are devotees.
In India,
it’s become synonymous – ‘bhaya-bhakti’
that means they’re uttering the word
Bhaya means fear,
bhakti means devotion,
they’re uttering these two words as if they’re same.
If you are in fear, obviously there is no devotion in you.
If you are in devotion, there just cannot be any fear in you.
There simply cannot be any fear in you if you are in a state of devotion,
but now people understand these two things
which are diametrically opposite to each other as one thing
because it’s convenient for them.
This has become the normal understanding
because all kinds of idiots, the most idiotic on the planet claim that they are devotees.
Stupidity is not devotion.
Devotion is a different dimension of intelligence
which has understood that intellect is a limited instrument,
with this you cannot grasp the world.
Stretch this intellect to its limit,
you will clearly realize with this
you can survive,
with this you can look smart in a tea party,
with this you can make money,
with this you can find a job,
but with this you cannot grasp the Existence.
It doesn’t take long to understand this.
If you understand this,
then you will naturally bow down and become a devotee.
It’s not an act,
it is absence of your rubbish, that’s devotion.
When your rubbish stops, devotion is.
Devotion is not an act
that if you go and do pooja in a temple or pray in a church or
stand upside down, that’s not devotion.
They’re trying to be.
Trying to work up their devotion.
Devotion means you have seen the limitations of who you are
and you have seen the boundlessness of what it is.
Compared to this and this,
it looks too small, too miniscule.
So naturally you will be devout, there is no other way to be.
You understand being identified with the smallness of who you are
is the only barrier you have and you will become devoid of yourself.
When you are devoid of yourself
you are a devotee, there is no other way.
Sadhguru: It’s not necessarily about patriotism or even nationalistic emotions
and it’s not about being against something imported.
It is not about promoting what we think is ours,
it’s not about that.
Most cultures on the planet, almost all cultures
with… with small exceptions within that culture,
in every culture has a little exception
but largely most cultures were built with the intention of survival and material well-being.
This culture was designed consciously for the inner well-being of the human being,
because here we distinctly understood that
with… by arranging material things around you,
only comfort and convenience will happen;
well-being will never happen.
Now, the clothes that you wear,
irrespective of Indian, western, whatever,
will set you up for a certain outside arrangement
but it will not fix your experience of life.
So here we were always interested in how the human being is.
We are not so concerned about how the outside arrangement is.
Because if this is fixed,
you can sit on a rock and be ecstatic.
If this is not fixed, you can sit in a palace and be utterly miserable.
This is the whole, you know,
affluent cultures in the world are displaying this enormously.
A whole lot of people,
a major segment of percentage of people are on verge of madness.
Every day if they don’t pop a pill, they’ll go off.
So we don’t want to do that.
And above all, when it comes to clothing,
in terms of textile –
no nation, no culture ever anywhere in the world has produced the variety of textile that India has produced.
The aesthetic behind it
Do you think anybody anywhere in the world can produce something like this?
Nowhere on the planet this is possible, believe me.
And within the country now –
there were many more in the past –
now there are about hundred and twenty distinct weaves
which involve a completely different understanding of weaving,
not slightly different,
distinct.
Many of them are on the verge of extinction
at least twenty percent of your clothing wardrobe must be Indian,
preferably handmade,
organic,
because if you’re interested in your health and well-being
it’s important what sits on your body through the day
it’s very important.
And you can see a distinct difference for our kind of weather,
for our atmosphere,
this clothing is an organic evolution from this.
Now, all the western clothing is essentially made for people who live in a cold country.
In Mumbai weather,
tying it up like this and putting a jacket and walking is hell!
Yes or no?
Now, there is no way you can exist in this weather,
in this atmosphere with those clothes, it’s madness!
But everybody’s doing it because somebody else has been doing it
and they have told us only if you do like this, it's civilized,
if you do it your way, you’re not civilized.
I’m the only Indian around (Laughter).
(Questioner): Some female spiritual leaders have said
that it is better for a woman to seek a female guru. Is it so?
(Sadehguru): It’s better? They say that? Ok. (Laughs)
Now, one thing if you are still a female
or a male
it means you are not yet spiritual;
and especially if you are still seeing a guru
as a male or a female,
you have no possibility.
You are still not able to disidentify yourself
with your body parts, its ok.
If you are still identifying your guru also
with his body parts or her body parts,
then you just don’t know what it is.
This is coming from absolute ignorance.
This is a reaction
to thousands of years of being down-trodden.
Socially may be correct,
spiritually not relevant.
If you look at your guru either as a man or a woman,
you missed the whole point.
[generally] all of us have about the same sized skull
[and] [let's] choose the lady
to a large extent most human [beings]
Have enough brain material in their head
everybody
Except somebody who may be severely deformed at birth
almost every average human being has
What it takes to do life?
But why is it that?
one person's brain
Sparkles with genius another person's brain
Sparkles with pain and suffering in tension and stress and whatever else
Well diverse thinks that nobody wants happens in People's minds
To use it a cushion of higher intelligence
Is it a question of some magical influence from somewhere?
or is it a question of
bringing the necessary Balance within yourself
so that you become available to the magic of Life a
Skewed intelligence however smart it may look on the periphery
Cannot make this life happen beautifully
Hello all balance
[its] needed balance and all levels
Otherwise our everybody in our very brain will function against us
to a point
where the only idea
or the only form of relaxation
today in the world
Either their sleep or drink or drug
All you're trying to do is to be brainless for a period of time
Because brain has become such a nuisance
If you didn't have one [you] would be at least peaceful
Yes
What took millions of [years] of evolution to achieve today has become a nuisance?
Watches, what is the greatest Miracle within this human frame?
Has become a misery manufacturing machine
There are many aspects to it. I don't I
Don't want to make it too simplistic
but above all
Above all the most important thing is balance or lack of balance
so
this human mechanism, which is
the most sophisticated instrument on the Planet
If you do not pay enough attention to it
If it turns against you there is nothing here in the world which can save you because nothing is more sophisticated in this one
Because this is of the highest level of evolution and sophistication if this [distance] against you
Nobody can save you I want you to know this
so if this should not turn against you it'll
To know the entirety of what this is it will take a certain level of attention
But to bring balance to this doesn't take too much
[it] is just that you're doing a few fundamental things absolutely wrong. That's all
To know the entirety of [what] this is
that's a whole lot of
attention Time education
Assistance guidance so many things are involved but to bring a reasonable sense of balance
To you it doesn't take much you're doing a few things
basically wrong with life
when I say basically wrong the one thing is for
Everybody to understand all human experience [is] generated from Within is the top
All human experience [is] generated to run [within]
So at any time if you feel happy or unhappy
miserable
Joyful Ecstatic in a state [of] agony
Doesn't matter what happens. What is your experience pleasantness or unpleasantness?
Just to know [that] it's happening from within and it can only happen from within
You can either take external stimuli or you can create your own stimuli
but essentially it happens from within
This one thing if it is not grasped when you feel miserable [if] you think it's this one, you're gone
You just the keyboard is here, but you're punching the wall
This is not going to work
This one basic fundamental thing is something that almost 90% of the humanity is always doing it wrong
Whenever they feel miserable if they think it must be this one, [or] that one or that one or that?
one
Now all human experience is generated from within
If something is feeling unpleasant first thing is to look at this
What am I doing wrong with this?
Am I eating wrong am I sleeping wrong am I sitting wrong am I breathing wrong is my heart beating wrong something?
My very chemistry is wrong
Something is wrong with this not with that
So the moment you think by kicking the wall you can fix this one, then you made a fundamental mistake
The harder you try the further away from it you go
so this possibility of
bringing balance to the system first of all
Is a fundamental nature of yoga the most basic forms of yoga whether it is. I know many of you are doing probably the
[Nadi] [Bachan] or Yoga namaskar or sugar Mascara Surya Kriya these are all basic forms of yoga
The first thing is to bring balance
Once there is balance then you can build a tower on top of this if there is no balance
Whatever you build will only lead to more trouble the more basic
You are the better it is so this is what a whole lot of humanity is seeking somehow to remain basic
Because if you build something it feels terrible when there is no fundamental balance
Anything standing up without balance is a big problem
So the best thing is [to] lie [down]
stay close to the ground if you grow tall it will be a problem so remain at the minimum a whole lot of
humanity has raised you reduced themselves to a minimal possible thing in their life if I don't get into [trouble] that's good enough a
whole lot of humanity
This is [a] serious waste of evolutionary work
What?
Has happened on this planet in the last few million [years] to evolve life from a simplest form to what it is today?
just wasting the entire process and
Mother Earth is not going to get you let let you get away with it
You will pay the price if you try to make life. Go backwards, it will make sure you pay the price, so
Instead of trying to do this that so many things first thing is to do something to bring balance
First step is just this that
Everything that I generate from within me in the form of experience
sensations painful
pleasant wonderful, horrible, whatever, I go through is
essentially generated from Within and nobody Else, but me
others May help
you [no]
Others help if you're miserable some people will fuel it and help if you're joyful some people will fuel that and help
The different types of people around us. They assist you as
They know their life
But essentially it is your making
This is the fundamental aspect of yoga the first teaching that came out was
[that] it is your Kerman that means it's your making your
[life] and the experience of your life is entirely your making if this one thing
Doesn't sink [into] absolutely you will not make the necessary changes
You still think yes? I know it's my karma, but you know my husband what he did
You can't fix this
First you understand this is my making entirely my making the moment you see it
You have the ability to change it I?
see it but
You know what they did to me yesterday
Now you can't change it
It doesn't matter who did what?
What is happening within you your experience of your [life] is entirely [your] making
This is your Karma
Karma means not something that drops upon you from somewhere
Karma means your action, it's your making it's your doing
So if you just set this one thing
Creating the necessary Balance will happen automatically
Once there is balance
Then you would want to try [many] things
Otherwise [I'm] talking [about] so many things up there in the sky
You will only be a spectator [you]
[will] not be the one who flies
You will only be a spectator because when there is no balance. You don't want to go three inches above the ground
So this is one fundamental thing we've been talking about this in many forms
but if you want to make the full scope if you want to make use of the full scope of
This body in this brain of this human possibility of this consciousness that we refer to as human being
Then first thing is this that you understand and fix it within you absolutely
that
The quality of my [life] is entirely my making and nobody else and nobody else
If you fix this one thing balance will come once balance comes
I am impatient to take you to places where only people with balance can walk
others cannot
you
(Questioner): Namaskaram Sadhguru, .'
I want to know 'Kalbhiarava
Just throw some light on it.
(Sadhguru): How to throw light on darkness?
(Laughter)
Kalbhairav means the dark one, that's one aspect of it.
We shouldn't throw light on him.
It is seen in many different ways.
It is a deadly form of Shiva.
When he went into a destructive mode,
not of destroying this or that,
of destroying time.
See all physical realities exist within the span of time, isn't it?
If I destroy your time
everything is over.
See, right now your clock is ticking lup-tup, lup-tup
along with your watch something else is ticking inside right?
Suppose we fast forward everything.
We just shhhhch. (Laughs)
Over... isn't it? (Laughter)
So Kalabhairav means just that
because
most people do not choose to live in a great manner
they have an aspiration, at least
they want to die in a great way.
So, Kalbhairav
is a deadly form of Shiva,
it was guaranteed
if you come to Kashi, you will attain to Mukti,
it doesn't matter what kind of a lousy creature you have been all your life.
So, all the lousy creatures started coming
because they lived badly,
and they want to die gloriously,
only the population of the lousy multiplied.
Then Shiva said,
'The place is becoming lousy, with so many lousy people,
so he said,'There needs to be some check.'
So, he took the form of Kalbhairav,
and it's called Bhairavi Yatna.
That means when the moment of death comes,
for all that you have been,
your whole many, many lifetimes
plays out
in,
in a moment
with great intensity
and whatever pleasures and sufferings and pains
that need to happen to you, will all happen,
it would have spread over many lifetimes,
but all that will happen to you, in a micro second
but with the kind of intensity that you cannot hold.
So, this is called as Bhairavi Yatna,
you know what Yatna means,
hmm?
Yatna means ultimate suffering.
It's something that happens to you in hell,
he will make it happen to you here,
So, when you want to do that kind of a job
you need a right kind of costume,
so he comes with the right kind of costume of looking terrible.
If he looks nice,that will be very evil, you know.
If somebody looks pleasant and does terrible things,
that would be evil.
If somebody has to do terrible things,
they should at least look terrible isn't it? (Laughs)
So, Shiva
put on the right kind of costume and became Kalbhairav
to create Bhairavi Yatna for you.
To create such phenomenal pain, that you have not imagined possible,
but just for a moment
so that after that nothing of the past remains in you,
undoing your software,
painful isn't it?
But this happens, at the moment of death,
you have no choice, you can''t run.
Yes,you can't run.,
but he makes it as brief as possible.
Suffering has to end quickly,
we must make it super intense,
then only it will end quickly.
If it is mild,
it goes on and on forever.
the word Prana
There is no equivalent word in English, but we can say it's the vital energy
That which we call it the life energy is Prana
Prana has
ten different manifestations in the body
but for the sake of understanding we'll bring it down to five
these five are
referred two as
Five vayus or panch vayus
this is
Prana Vayu
Samana Vayu, Udhana Vayu, Aphana and Vyana
they're in charge of different dimensions of
what happens in this human mechanism
This an endless subject if I speak like this, I'm just trying to abridge it in a sensible manner
taking charge
of this. Yama means to control or to take charge
Pranayaam means a method with which you want to take charge of these Panch Vayus
because how
your body functions how your mind functions how the whole physiological framework
this human mechanism how it functions
is determined by this energy.
This is an energy
It is an intelligent energy, in the sense
it carries a certain amount of memory
The Karmic memory of the individual person is imprinted on this energy, so in each person
the Prana
functions in a different manner.
It is unique to each individual. It is not like
like electricity
Electricity is not smart
it can light up the
you know the light bulb, it can run the camera, it can
you know run the air conditioning. It can do million things but not because of its intelligence
It does the same thing always
Because of a particular device a certain thing happens, but now I am talking about
This will happen in future that you may have smart electricity
It is not far away. In the next 50 years you may have smart energy that the energy behaves in a particular way
you can make it behave in a certain way because you can imprint certain memory upon it, so
this is an
Intelligent energy where a certain amount of imprint is there
Because of that it functions in a specific manner in an individual person that is
going into an extremely refined form of Pranayaam where we particularly
design something for an individual person because he is in a certain way
For that to come to that level it will need a general level of Pranayaam on where it takes care of this 5 Vayus
If one has a certain mastery
over these five Vayus, there is no such thing as
Physical Ailment or
Particularly psychological ailment is out of question. If somebody takes charge of their prana
whatever may be the external atmosphere
whatever influences in terms of reverberations, waves
emotions, other kinds of pressures
Doesn't matter what
Psychological Balance is
100% guaranteed for a person who takes charge of his prana, always.
when I say balance
maybe
most of you won't be medically considered imbalanced
but a whole lot of people are psychologically balanced. Suppose you have a hand
Suppose this hand simply pops up right now
It pokes into your eyes, and it scratches you and beats you. If your hand starts doing this
There's a sickness isn't it? At least your hand is sick
Let me not blame the whole person. At least your hand is sick for sure isn't it?
Well, this is what most people's minds are doing
Every day, it's scratches you from inside makes you cry make you bawl make you worry
In so many varieties of suffering it pokes your eyeballs out many times
Is it not doing?
It is sick
Maybe in a socially accepted manner
But it is sick
So one who takes charge of his prana can be 100% assured his pychological balance is
there. You cannot shake it
Physiological Balance also is there but physiological ailments may happen due to various reasons.
One thing is there are infections and other you know organisms who want to live
Yes they want to live
another thing is variety of
chemicals and poisons and stuff we may swallow knowingly unknowingly
And it can cause things, so physiological ailment
is I would say
90 percent guaranteed that it won't happen, but psychological well-being is 100 percent guaranteed
If you are psychologically in an extremely good place
ten percent of physiological problems are not even a problem you know
It's not even a problem. Most of the time what little things that may happen to the body
that's not the thing. What reaction that happens in your mind is the big thing isn't it?
Yes, or no
So Pranayaam means you want to take charge of the vital forces
As I said they have an intelligence of their own each one of them
either during birth
after conception how they enter the Newborn
and how they leave the dead in this it clearly displays it has an intelligence of its own. One may not notice this unless
they become very conscious about these things
It's a world by itself if you ask me
It takes a certain level of attention. The word attention may not go deep enough
I'm using the word attention because the other words are horribly corrupted
awareness and this and that I've badly badly corrupted
So I am using the word attention but the word attention is not
suggesting what is needed. Just mental alertness is not enough
It has to become really attentive. If you make yourself like that, you know how these five are functioning
(Sadhguru): There is a place in the Himalayan region
approximately around fourteen thousand seven hundred
fourteen thousand eight hundred feet above mean sea level
which is known as the Kanthi Sarovar.
Kanthi Sarovar means a lake of grace.
It is called a lake of grace
because this is where
the first yoga program happened
over fifteen thousand years ago.
The first yoga program,
this was the site,
the bank of this Sarovar.
There are whole lot of stories why geographically
it happened here
because Adiyogi was not here earlier; he was elsewhere.
It's lots of stories but I will not go into the stories, okay.
So he happened to be there,
on the banks of this lake
and this is where with seven disciples
he started his first yoga program.
This place is very significant on the
in the whole planet this place is very significant
because it's in this place
for the first time a human being perceived that
if we strive, we can evolve.
Adiyogi when he spoke about evolution,
I know (Laughs)
the theory of evolution is hundred and fifty years old.
You know last year was the two hundredth birth anniversary of Charles Darwin.
At the age of fifty-four he propounded.
So it is less than hundred and fifty years old.
But Adiyogi spoke about the evolution in a certain way.
He said,
“First the divine manifested in the form of fish,
life under water.
You’ve heard of –
at least the Indian people –
you heard of the nine avataras?
Hmm?
Or avatar means only a Hollywood movie for you?
What has happened?
Nine manifestations of the divine.
The first manifestation in the form of a fish,
life under water.
The second manifestation –
tell me what's the avataras,
Matsya Avatara and then what?
Koorma Avatara which means a turtle,
that means an amphibious life.
The second manifestation of the divine is amphibious, half in half out.
The third manifestation is Varaha Avatara,
divine manifested in the form of a boar.
Why a boar,
why it's being referred to as a boar,
the third manifestation is.
among the mammals,
which is the basis for the making of the human being later on,
among the mammals
one animal which is most strongly rooted in its body is a pig,
you can't kill a pig easily.
Do you know this? Hmm?
See, in where we are, the Yoga Center
the tribal boys, they’re going to school,
if they see a deer, three, four of them corner it
with a stick they’ll kill it.
One thing they’ll kill it;
so easy to kill a deer
but a wild boar is not like that.
You break its body, it’ll not die.
It's very, very strongly rooted in its body.
So if somebody is very physical
you say ‘Oh he is like a pig.’
Yes or no?
Because physically, it's a very rooted life.
So the next form of the divine is Varaha Avatara or a wild boar.
What's the next one?
Narasimha Avatara which is half man and half animal form.
The next manifestation of the divine is Vamana Avatara,
a dwarf man.
Next one is Parasurama Avatara,
a full-fledged man but emotionally volatile man;
so volatile he lopped off his own mother’s head;
such an angry man.
The next one is Rama Avatara,
a peaceful man.
The next one is Krishna Avatara,
a loving man.
Next one is supposed to be the Buddha, a meditative man.
The next one is supposed to be a mystical human being.
So this need not necessarily mean that one person.
They’re talking about humanity evolving,
life evolving in a certain way.
So this Adiyogi said over fifteen thousand years ago.
Does it run very much parallel to Darwin’s Theory of Evolution?
Yes or no?
It’s nearly there, isn't it?
In fact, it's very much there.
So this was said fifteen thousand years ago
not hundred and fifty years ago.
And then he said,
“As human beings physically you have evolved to a point.
Further evolution is not possible,
unless some dramatic changes happen in the solar system.’
It's very uncanny about four years ago
the neuro scientists came up with this fact
that human brain cannot evolve further;
you can learn to use it better
but it cannot evolve further
because the only way it can be evolved is
either you must increase the size of the neuron
to become more capable or
you have to increase the number of neurons.
If you increase the number of neurons,
clarity will be lost.
This happens to many children,
when they are born they’re brilliant but they can't do anything properly
because there is no clarity.
It takes some time to shed some of the neurons,
reduce the number of neurons in the brain
and then they become stable
but otherwise they are all crackling,
they can't do anything straight because there is no clarity.
If you increase the size of the neuron,
the power or the energy that it consumes is too much.
Right now as you sit here;
in a resting state when you sit down
twenty percent of your calorific energy
is being consumed by your brain right now,
even if it's not doing anything very creative. (Laughs)
Yes.
In a resting state twenty percent of your energy is
being consumed by your brain
because brain is a very high energy consuming part of your body.
Twenty percent, it's a small thing
so much body consumes eighty percent
this much brain consumes twenty percent of the energy.
If you increase the size of the neuron,
the volume of energy that it consumes will become such,
the body cannot sustain it.
So neurogists are saying
human brain cannot evolve further
because the physical laws will not allow it.
The Laws of Physics will not allow it.
So he said physical evolution is finished
according to the laws of physics. That’s the modern statement.
Adiyogi said,
“Unless the dynamics of the solar system changes,
which means unless physical laws change …on the planet
evolution cannot go further than this.
But you can evolve in ways which are not physical
and there is a way to do it.
If you strive you can evolve.”
This is the most dynamic and creative process for a human being
that the way you are right now,
whatever limitations nature has fixed upon you right now
is not concrete,
is not one hundred percent.
If you strive you can cross these boundaries.
So this idea and the possibility of evolution
and the technologies to evolve as to what you can do to evolve
this happened on the banks of this Kanthi Sarovar.
About six to eight kilometers above Kedarnath.
It's not a touristy place;
it's something you have to trek in the snow
otherwise you won't make it.
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji when you said about the common person
and the special person,
I know some teachers have always told us
and why your own parents always tell you that you know –
you are special,
each one of us is unique
and each one of us is special
Sadhguru: No. No, my parents told me you’re freaky (Laughter).
See, they never said, I’m special.
Juhi Chawla: We’ll come back to our parents now
and
and I remember
I remember this part,
I am not sure whether I heard it at your discourse
or on a DVD of yours,
where you said
It was about you know people being special
and us always thinking that God knows of us.
And you said something like,
“Do you know all the grasshoppers in your garden?”
So, of course all of us have said, “No”.
So, you said something like,
“So, how does God know each one of you then?”
And I was devastated
because I always thought somebody up there knows me,
cares about me and I’m special.
Sadhguru: You thought
you thought you’re number o….
you thought you were number one in his books is it?
Juhi Chawla: Well, I’ve been told since I was kid,
you’re special, you’re unique and God cares about you.
Sadhguru: Let me tell… See,
if when somebody says you’re unique, it’s an insult (Juhi Laughs).
You know
It’s like this –
in this vast cosmos, this solar system is just a speck.
Tomorrow morning if the whole solar system disappears,
vanishes,
evaporates,
nobody will even notice it.
Maybe it’s not even in the accounts books of creation,
it’s so small.
In this speck of a solar system,
planet earth is a super speck.
In that, Mumbai is a micro super speck.
In that, you are a big man or a woman (Laughter).
It’s a hilarious problem.
This is a very immense existential problem, you know.
This is because we have lost perspective
as to who we are, what we are,
our psychological realities have become bigger than the
cosmic reality.
That is a big problem.
It’s time you step out of your cinema
I‘m… I’m not talking about the Hindi cinema,
I’m talking about the cinema
that everybody’s playing in their own minds.
See,
See right now they darkened this whole hall
because it works best that way.
This is the basic technology of a cinema,
if you do not darken the cinema hall,
if you light it up and play a nice cinema,
it’s not going to work.
You have to darken it.
So, I’m saying,
a cinema of your mind because it’s a dark space.
Every thought is enlarged,
playing out bigger than the cosmic space.
Today,
everything in the cosmos is happening perfectly well,
but you have one nasty thought crawling in your head
and it feels like a bad day, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes. Yes.
Sadhguru: So, that’s because
your psychological realities,
your petty creation has become larger than the creator’s creation.
You lost perspective of life.
That is the fundamental basis of all this confusion and suffering.
If you see who you are,
the micro speck that you are,
you wouldn’t imagine that God is made in your own image
and he looks like you and whatever.
Okay,
if… if we were all buffalos,
we would definitely think God is a big buffalo (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Okay. Okay, so what is it really?
Please tell us the
Please define it for us, what is it?
What is going on – this life, this love.
All these emotions that we go through in our lives,
all these thoughts that we create for ourselves,
what is going on?
Sadhguru: See… These are all human possibilities and capabilities.
Every possibility becomes a problem
for those who do not explore the possibility in it’s right perspective.
Thought is a tremendous possibility.
An ant cannot think like you,
he can work better than you,
he’s more disciplined,
he betters main… better traffic rules than you,
there’s no traffic jam out there (Laughter),
okay
but he cannot think like you.
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: That sets up apart.
This is a possibility.
But now, this possibility has become a problem
for ninety percent of the humanity.
Now they’re freaking
because they can think
and they’re thinking all the wrong things.
Their thoughts have become nasty;
if they were pleasant
they would have enjoyed their thought process.
Because it’s become nasty,
it’s becoming a ailment, isn’t it?
People are suffering their thoughts immensely.
Because, they do not know how to keep it pleasant,
nothing has been done towards it.
So, what is a possibility always becomes a problem
if you do not explore it in a right perspective.
So your thought and emotion has become a problem,
now love affair is a problem,
you’re making all kinds of things out of it,
which are all coming from this misunderstanding,
not understanding this thought and emotion is generated by me,
I can generate it whichever way I want.
If nastiness is what you like, you do it.
I don’t care if that’s what you like
but you’re suffering it.
If you’re suffering it, you shouldn’t be doing it.
I am not telling you, be loving.
What is your choice –
pleasantness or unpleasantness?
If unpleasantness is your choice,
you enjoy it and do it, what’s my problem?
You want to drink poison, what is my problem?
I am just telling you this is poison, this is this –
drink whatever you want, but by choice.
Don’t drink unconsciously, that’s stupid.
That’s not befitting of a human being,
a human being means we are far more conscious
than every other creature on this planet –
that’s what sets up apart.
Every creature eats
but we can eat consciously.
So our eating becomes, so many things.
Every creature has sexual drives,
they go and fulfill it whichever way.
We can do it consciously.
So, we become something something.
We’re doing the same things
but we’re doing it consciously,
suddenly there is a magic about it,
not because sex is magic,
food is magic, no.
Because we can do it consciously,
every basic act like eating and copulating
becomes magical because we can do it consciously.
If you leave that one thing,
if you exclude that one thing from your life
that you are not conscious about the way you think,
the way you feel,
the way you act,
the way you move your body –
if you’re not conscious about it everything can turn ugly,
everything can become nasty.
So it is this which sets you apart from every other creature.
So, a dog is walking on the street,
if you show it a biscuit it will wag its tail,
if you do this (Gestures), grrr it will do.
If this is what you are
that if somebody is nice it you, you will wag your whatever,
if somebody’s not nice to you, you will bite them.
I’m saying what… where is evolution in you?
Forget about civilization,
I’m, talking about evolution.
Where’s the evolution,
where’s the sign of evolution I’m asking? (Applause)
There has been such a dynamic change in the sunspots.
There is going to be very dynamic change in the sunspots in the coming six years.
So whenever such changes happen in the sun or in the pattern of the way the sun functions,
always it has been found
phenomenal changes happen in human consciousness.
But it is not a directed change;
it is not a guided change.
Changes will happen
like a full moon day
or a new moon day,
on these days there are certain changes happening within a human being.
Most human beings do not notice it but it is happening.
If you were psychologically fragile,
then you would distinctly notice it.
People who are psychologically imbalanced for some reason,
on that day they will find they are much more imbalanced.
So it is happening,
but those who are meditative will become much more meditative.
Those who are gentle will become much more gentle.
Those who are loving will become much more loving.
Those who are insane will become much more insane.
So it will set a certain pitch but it does not direct.
If you are completely at the mercy of the forces around you,
you will be very volatile, up and down.
The whole ocean is rising.
So you think nothing is happening in this body?
Definitely it's happening.
Now the sunspots will definitely create
some kind of volatile energy,
but how will… it will work out for human beings is left to us.
That’s why I said,
‘If we have a prediction and wait for it, we don't know how it’ll go.
If we have a plan,
any volatile situation is also a possibility
because things are mobile, things are more fluid,
this is the time to craft things the way we want.
So it is a possibility.
Does it mean the possibility is only now, it's not been?
No, always these things are happening,
at certain times it may be little more than other times.
So in terms of nature,
in terms of how the planet functions,
how the natural and celestial forces function upon this planet
in the coming six years is going to be somewhat different.
Maybe ‘somewhat’ is not the right word,
different in a reasonably marked way.
So if we have a plan
to make use of this volatile nature,
if we prepare enough people who are
have the necessary sadhana,
who have necessary focus within themselves,
then definitely human consciousness could rise much more easily than other times.
In that way it is little more conducive but one must understand
It's like this,
if the wind blows, if you fly like this, if you have an airplane and if you fly into the wind effortlessly you will fly.
Suppose you’re in the wrong direction you will crash.
Wind is just blowing not to make you fly,
not to make you crash, it just blows.
But it's up to you whether you use it to fly or to crash.
So, right now sunspots are significantly different,
in the coming six years.
Because of this there will be some marked difference in the way the planet functions.
We can rise or we can crash.
I have a plan to rise,
please go with me.
Sadhguru: Always we’ve never referred to as enlightenment
as an accomplishment,
we’ve never referred to enlightenment
as some kind of an achievement.
It is only a realization.
Realization means what?
Something that’s already there,
you only saw it today.
You were just dumb.
You’re… Right here,
you didn’t see it all your life,
suddenly one day you saw it -
this is realization.
This is not a discovery,
this is not an invention,
this is not an achievement,
this is not any kind of attainment -
this is just a realization.
So realization doesn’t need any knowledge -
just takes eyes to see, that’s all.
You don’t have to have knowledge about this tree to see it
and know that it’s there.
You just see it.
If you see it, absolutely see it
without any interruption of thought,
emotion, ideologies, belief systems -
simply you saw it the way it is in its entirety,
this is realization.
Now we are not even talking about a tree,
we’re just talking about ourselves,
we just realized something about ourselves -
it’s the dumbest thing (Laughs).
But even that dumb thing doesn’t happen to everybody
they’re dumber than that (Laughs).
They are striving hard to see that it doesn’t happen
because they have enshrined their thoughts,
they have enshrined their emotions,
they have enshrined their ideologies,
they have enshrined their belief systems,
they have enshrined everything that is not true.
So, truth won’t happen to them, that’s all.
When you say a thought,
it is something that you concocted in your mind.
Yes?
When you say emotion,
it is something that you concocted within you.
An ideology -
maybe ten of you together did it.
A belief system -
maybe you have a million people with you
but you made it up.
When you are giving such significance to things that you made up,
things that are,
things that which is the making of the Creator
not available to you because
you are too busy with your own creation.
Your petty creation has become larger
than this grand creation
which you can’t figure anything about.
Somewhere your own thoughts,
your own emotions,
your own ideas, please see they’ve become far more important
than any other cosmic phenomena that’s happening right now.
Moon is coming up -
who cares?
What you’re thinking,
what you’re feeling is more important.
It doesn’t matter
the galaxy is a blossoming right now -
who cares?
What I think and feel is more important.
My thought and my emotion is more important than all this.
So when you have such a skewed attention span
towards life
realization itself looks like a tremendous achievement.
So if realization happens without the necessary fundamentals,
then naturally holding on to the body will not happen.
The body and the being are bound to come apart
because the realization is just that –
that you’ve realized
that what you thought as you is not really you,
it’s a piece of earth
and what is you is something else
and it has no business with this actually.
So if you want to be realized and still be… walk around -
you can be around but you can’t walk around -
if you want to walk around,
then you must know all the nuts and bolts of life
and the life making material.
You must know the mechanics of this system,
then you can know how to anchor yourself to it,
otherwise realization normally spells
that you don’t stay with the body,
doesn’t matter really to yourself
but it matters to others.
If a realized being can walk around
there’re many, many things that can be done.
If ten thousand realized beings walked around on this planet,
everything would be done –
everything -
the right way, the way it’s best for life on this planet.
We’re striving (Laughs),
we’re working.
So how do you acquire this knowledge?
That takes time and striving.
Knowledge will not happen in a moment,
realization can happen in a moment.
Knowledge will not happen in a moment,
any knowledge will not happen in a moment.
One has to strive,
one has to invest their lives into it,
otherwise it’ll not happen.
Conditional investment is what I mostly get.
Very few people are unconditional investment,
others are all conditional investors –
“Yes Sadhguru I want to do it but…”
By the time we kick the but out (Laughter),
you know life gets over (Laughs).
There’re very few people no “buts”,
they’re just here and that’s it.
With them we’ll build knowledge (Laughs).
Sadhguru: See, because yoga is not an exercise form,
it has other dimensions to it,
teaching it as a compulsory process in the school has its limitations.
It may… You may reduce yoga into a gymnastic process,
which will be a severe
It’s a crime to do that.
But there is something called as Upa Yoga
that means sub-yoga or useful processes of doing things
which has no spiritual dimension attached to it.
If you do Upa Yoga or Angamardhana systems of yoga,
fitness is assured,
you will not need any equipment,
all you need is six by six floor and you will be super fit
and you can build your muscle, everything.
Only thing is you won’t become like this (Gestures).
A whole lot of people have become like this (Gestures),
they think they are fit.
I think they are in a straightjacket (Laughter).
It’s not just strength,
it’s not just the bulge of your muscle.
The flexibility of your body is as important for proper functioning of the system.
In yoga we are not just looking at the muscular strength
and other structure alone.
The… the organ health is very important.
So the system is evolved so that there is organ health.
Now, you’ve got this (Gestures),
your liver is not working properly – what’s the use?
This… this whole thing, I always wonder… (Gestures)
Have you seen people who have built muscle (Gestures),
they… they did lot of weight (Gestures)
What's the point of that?
It’s very important the body is flexible and usable.
If it’s just about showing rocks –
you can wear pads and show it to people (Laughter).
Piyush Pandey: In our society, there is a bias
towards skill
against skill.
We try and believe that being a babu in a railway station
is probably a better job
than being a retail employee.
I think that’s a huge need of the country at this point of time
and I heard that
the Principal Secretary of skills of Maharashtra is here ,
I personally believe that
if you are confident about yourself, the world will change itself.
I would like you to comment on this
because it's very relevant to some very hard-working people here
that they get the respect in society
and they learn to self-respect themselves
in the years ahead of us.
Sadhguru: The world respecting you is the quality of the world around you.
If they are that kind, they will respect you (Laughs).
But I know a lot has been said about this,
but you respecting yourself
I think is a little crazy.
Respect is between two people.
But I’m asking anybody here,
isn’t respect between two people,?
that you respect somebody for who they are?.
“I respect myself” –
you must be mad because
these things
Like this is a big thing you know, in America,
people are saying
all these days they used to say, ‘“I believe in god,’”,
now they say, “‘I believe in myself”.’
All these days they used to say, “‘I love you’” to somebody.
These days they have started, ‘“I love myself.’”
See, to love,
to believe,
to respect,
you need two.
If you have become two within yourself,
for sure you’re heading for madness
If you really become two, then we say you’re schizophrenic, isn't it?
So this has been worked in so many different ways –
by religious people,
by new- age philosophers,
all kinds. –
“I love myself,
I respect myself,
I believe in myself,
me and my ego,
me and my soul” –
all kinds of things.
I’m asking you, all of you, –
within your body, are you one person or two people?
Please make up your mind right now,.
one or two?
So, this self respect business has to go because
this will lead to all kinds of expectations.
I respect myself.,
I think I’m a big guy,.
Now I expect you also to treat me like that.
When you don’t, I will become resentful,
angry,
all kinds of things.
There is no need for me to respect myself.
but if I respect somebody,
it may not even be because of their quality;.
it is because of my quality, I respect somebody, isn't it?
See, you looking up to something
not necessarily mean that that person is in a fantastic place.
It is just that
you’ are in a place of learning,
you’ are in a place of moving upward in your life,.
so you’re looking up.
You’re looking up to something means you’re moving upward.
If you’re looking down upon something means you’re moving downward, isn't it?
So, respect is between two people.
I don’t see how it is applicable. “-
within myself, I respect myself,
I believe myself,
I love myself” –
these are all statements of the insane..
Vinita Bali: Sadhguru, what are some of the things that you know,
all of us who are here listening to you,
what are the one or two things that we can do tomorrow,
which will
which will increase this level of awareness, perception, thoughtfulness?
Sadhguru: Oh! You’re talking about a takeaway, hmm?
Vinita Bali: In a sense but you know, an enduring takeaway.
It’s not light hearted,
it’s not you know. because we’ve… you know.
we’ve heard a lot and I’m sitting here and saying, okay,
so what do I do differently tomorrow?
Sadhguru: Let’s say to learn A-B-C, the twenty-six alphabets
at least if you had learned the Indian… Indian languages, you know fifty-four whatever
twenty-six alphabets, how long did you take to learn to write them properly in their proper order
and use them whichever way you want, how long did you take?
Vinita Bali: Oh! I’m still at it, a long time.
Sadhguru: At least three- four years minimum.
Vinita Bali: Yeah, yeah.
Sadhguru: To learn to make sentences and use the way you want,
maybe you took twelve-fifteen years of education.
Vinita Bali: Much longer than that, yes.
Sadhguru: `So, you gave so much just to learn some word craft
but to know something about the fundamental nature of your existence,
which could just change you dimensionally,
you want to know it in two minutes.
Why are you so unfair?
Vinita Bali: No, I only want to know where to start in two minutes.
Sadhguru: Okay. Where to start?
Just do this much - before you go to bed today,
one thing is, every hour, okay, remind yourself,
right now it’s going to be eight o’ clock,
eight o’ clock remind yourself – “Wow! I’m still alive” (Laughter).
No, don’t laugh.
So many people who go to bed today will not wake up tomorrow morning.
More than a million people on the planet will not wake up tomorrow morning.
Tomorrow morning, suppose you wake up, (Laughter)
Yes, who knows?
You always think, “It’s not me, it’s going to be somebody” (Laughter)
very cruel (Laughs).
Tomorrow morning if you do wake up,
first check (Gestures)
“Am I really awake, alive? I’m still alive, wow!”
You don’t have to do anything, don’t scream or something (Laughter),
at least one big smile,
“Okay, I’m still alive, over a million people didn’t wake up tonight
but here I am, alive”
fantastic or no?
Participants: Yes.
What is the biggest thing in your life?
You are alive right now. So, you’re still on tomorrow morning
just one smile, wow (Gestures)!
Then maybe there are two, three, four people who matter to you much in your life,
just check (Gestures) (Laughter),
he and she and that one and this one is alive – all alive, great!
If one million people died tonight, which they do every night,
at least ten million people lost somebody who is dear to them
but none of those, who are very dear to you are gone today,
fantastic or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Tch, another big smile, don’t tell anybody (Laughter),
just smile, okay, great.
Eight o’ clock in the morning – wow,
eight o’ clock, still alive.
Every one hour, just do this exercise, okay?
Every one hour, just remind yourself,
check (Gestures) – on.
Please understand this,
if you think about god, you will become hallucinatory.
Only when you are conscious about your mortality,
will you want to truly know the nature of this life (Referring to oneself).
When you know you’re on right now and tomorrow morning, you may be poof, gone,
now you want to know,
“What the hell? What is this (Referring to oneself)?”
I’m real right now but tomorrow morning, gone.
So many people who are so real and on, suddenly gone.
Can’t believe where did they go
but you thought about it for ten minutes and then you got busy.
You had to text, “My father is dead” (Laughter).
But remind yourself of your own mortality.
Let the question deepen. If you can do it every moment, it’s great.
If you cannot, at least once a hour,
remind yourself that you are mortal. You are not immortal, you are mortal.
If you know that you are mortal, suddenly you will see in a few days,
you have no time to do any nonsense, which doesn’t mean anything to you.
You will do only what really matters to your life.
You have no time to do any rubbish with anybody.
You will have time only to make the… do the best things that you want to do,
what you truly care to do in your life
and nothing other than that and that’s what you should be doing
because it’s a very limited amount of time (Applause).
I want you to know it’s a very brief life - that is, if you’re a joyful person.
If you are a miserable person, of course it’s a long life (Laughter).
So (Laughs), if you’re joyful, if you live for hundred years, it’s gone too quickly.
If you’re miserable, what a long life you will live, you know.
So, it’s a very brief life, you should not be doing anything
other than what truly matters to you, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: But you are doing so much nonsense, which doesn’t mean anything to you,
simply because you think you are immortal.
Otherwise people are saying,
“No, I will live up to eighty, maybe hundred. So, I will do this at seventy.
I will… I will smile at my neighbor when I am seventy-five you know,
when all my work is done (Laughter).
When all the property issues are settled (Laughter), after that I’ll smile at him.”
There is no such guarantee.
Has anybody here come with a guarantee card for two days (Laughter)?
No, you could be dead tomorrow morning.
I’m not wishing that, I bless you with a long life but it’s possible, right?
Every day, it’s happening to a million people means,
can’t it be you and me tomorrow morning, I’m asking?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you are conscious of your mortality,
becoming aware will naturally happen
because the significance of being alive will blossom.
You used all kinds of words, which are straight from the American coast –
mindfulness, awareness, mental alertness –
no,
you need to separate these things.
Being mentally alert will help you to survive better.
If I’m mentally alert, I can drive better, I can do my work better,
I can do something else better,
it’s survival.
Vinita Bali: Right.
Sadhguru: Awareness is not about survival.
When I first asked you the question,
how do you know that you’re here, you went around and then you said, “I’m conscious.”
Only because you are aware, you’re alive.
Your awareness is aliveness, your aliveness is awareness
the question is only about how alive.
Lot of people think if they are fifty percent alive, it’s pretty good.
Yes, you can survive fifty percent
but you need to understand, if we want to torture somebody
if you want to torture somebody, what would you do?
You’ll kill them?
Suppose you got… got employment in hell, let’s say,
you’re given the job of torturing people, what will you do?
Kill them?
Hello?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: No. Keep them half alive (Laughter/Applause).
If you keep them half alive, that’s called torture.
So right now, this is called self-torture,
maybe you’re preparing for employment elsewhere (Laughter).
Because right from the age of two or three, people… your parents are asking you,
“What will you become?
What will you become?”
Well, I’m born as a human being,
I’m supposed to strive to become a human being.
See, every life on this planet,
whether it is a bird it’s a worm, insect, bird, animal, tree, whatever,
every one of them is striving to become a full-fledged life and that’s all.
A worm is trying to be a full-fledged worm,
a tree is trying to be a full-fledged tree
that’s all a human being also, to become a full-fledged human being.
No, no, what will you become means what kind of job will you get
from the age of three (Laughs)!
This madness has come because of this whatever the last century of poverty in the country,
people are so deprived and they think if they don’t have a job, they won’t eat anything.
Tch, you know,
it comes from a certain poverty consciousness
we must pass it, that generation is passed.
Right now,
if you have a few brain cells working, you can make a… living,
yes?
You don’t have to be qualified for anything.
If you have a few brain cells working in your head, you can make a living, that’s not a issue anymore.
There was a time it was like that,
it's no more like that, it’s time we leave that,
it’s not about what you will become,
how you will be.
What will be the experience of your life?
Will it become the peak experience or is it just a mediocre nonsense
this is the question.
Because once you have come as a human being,
whatever happens, it’s not enough, something more needs to happen.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You may think you’re doing different things.
The man who goes to the temple,
the man who goes to the bar,
the man who goes to work,
the man who goes to conquer the world,
every one of them is just seeking a larger slice of life.
Some people go to the mall,
some people go the PDS,
just like that
some people think it… it comes free in the temple, so they go there,
somebody else go (goes?) to conquer the world,
somebody goes shopping.
What is it that you’re trying to do?
Just trying to have a larger slice of life.
But it doesn’t matter if you gather the whole world around you,
you will not have a larger slice.
Your larger slice will happen only if your ability to perceive is enhanced.
If your ability to experience is not enlarged,
then you can have everything around you,
still your experience is the same.
Modern life is just that.
No other generation had the things that we are having around us,
most homes are looking like a warehouse (Laughter)
because their shopping trips,
they don’t know where to keep it,
everything is falling all over the people,
there’s no place for the people, full of things,
but does it bring well-being or happiness or anything?
No.
You cannot determine the experience of what’s happening within you from outside.
It has to happen from within
and it is… How enlarged your experience is,
is how big your life is,
not about socially how big people think you are.
That may work socially a few things for you but it do
it doesn’t work in terms of life.
So, when we say awareness,
we are talking about the essential ingredient of life
because only because you are aware, you’re alive.
Isn’t it so?
Yes?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Now the question is, how alive?
If you have to use an analogy - right now,
this light is, you know, blinding me (Laughs).
Now if you reduce the voltage, it’ll be like this (Gestures),
it’ll light up only that much (Gestures).
But they want it to light up everything, so they turned up the voltage.
So, if you turn down the voltage, you will see only this much (Gestures),
if you turn it up, you will see that much (Gestures),
if you really turn it up, you will see the entire hall.
Awareness is the same thing.
Because you are conscious or you are aware,
you know something.
If you become little more aware, you will know something more,
if you become little more aware, something more.
All these words are connected
pragna, the word guru, all these things are connected
because pragna means you’re conscious.
Because you are conscious, depending upon the intensity of your consciousness,
accordingly your vision of everything around you is enhanced.
Now the word guru means,
gu means darkness – tch, it’s a four letter word you know (Laughs)
ru means dispeller.
So a guru is not supposed to teach you something,
he is not supposed to give you a philosophy,
not supposed to give you an ideology.
It is just that he is supposed to throw little more light.
Little more light means,
if I suppose this hall is dark and you’re only able to see the first two rows,
you are not able to see them (Gestures),
if I flashed a torch light, you saw,
“Oh, all those people, it’s a whole world out there.”
But I switched off the torch, then you know,
“There is something, now I have to see.
What do I need?
I need a torch beam of my own, okay” (Laughs)? This is the job.
Because they… the children in the home where I am staying, they’re declaring,
“He is… He is not like a guru, he doesn’t talk like a guru, he doesn’t look like a guru,
he doesn’t walk like a guru, he’s not a guru” (Laughter).
I’m very glad,
I’m getting certified (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Now, about seeing everything the way it is
because if I want to walk through this
There’re whole lot of people right now, belief systems, you believe in god, all right?
Now, I know in the corporate world, people have shifted this,
“I believe in myself” (Laughs).
Vinita Bali: Which is somewhat misplaced but that’s okay (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: Both are misplaced,
they produce different kinds of impacts.
Vinita Bali: Absolutely.
Sadhguru: See, belief means what?
Essentially, belief means
you’re unwilling to admit what you do not know as “I do not know”.
Whatever you do not know, you believe.
If you believe, what it does to you is, it’ll give you confidence.
Confidence without clarity is a disaster.
Right now, let us say, I cannot see these people (Gestures),
my vision is not clear but I have great confidence,
I’m going to walk through these people.
You know what I will do? I’ll step over everybody and go
because I’m very confident.
There’re whole lot of people like this.
If my vision is clear, I will go through this without even touching anybody.
If my vision is not clear and I have no confidence,
I will ask, “Please, can somebody show me the way?”
But now, I have no clarity but I have confidence
it’s a disastrous process.
So believing in god, believing in yourself,
believing in anything means –
it’s just a “b” word, you know?
You’re just bullshitting yourself about something that you do not know (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: Right, right.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) What is the problem,
“What I know, I know, what I do not know, I do not know” –
what is the problem with this?
If this much sincerity enters your life, come to this much –
“What I know, I know,
what I do not know, I do not know. I don’t believe anything,
I don’t disbelieve anything,
I am willing to look at everything.”
You’ll become a sensible human being
and every one hour, you remind yourself you are mortal
and you know, celebrate with a smile that you’re still alive,
you will see wonders will happen to you (Laughs).
Vinita Bali: Thank you. Great (Applause)!
So, even a free-flowing
Sadhguru: Hey, wait, wait, it’s eight o’ clock.
Vinita Bali: No, no, no, no, we have more time (Laughter),
we have more time,
I was just going to say
Sadhguru: No, I... I’m not saying that,
it’s eight o’ clock you’re still alive,
wow (Laughter/Applause)!
Vinita Bali: We are all alive (Applause)!
That’s the collective celebration (Sadhguru laughs).
Questioner: Sir, what are your views
on having a strong military for making our strong nation Sir?
Sadhguru: See, we have a one million strong military.
I want you to understand
except maybe one nation
nobody ever even thinks it's worth bombing this country (Laughter).
Yes, I want you to get this straight (Laughs).
So right now
our quarrels with
what was the part of this nation
now a neighborhood,
what was one nation,
now a part of our neighborhood
all right we can't change that now
for this how much are we investing?
For one tiny quarrel what is our investment?
It's too much.
Right now we’re planning to buy the …the French Dassault Fighters.
It's …each one of them costs six hundred crores.
Bhoom, one crash, in a second it's gone, okay?
I am saying
we must have a military,
we are still not in such a level consciousness in the world,
people can simply live without protection,
we must have a strong military, we have.
It needs to be upgraded in many ways; that will be done.
I was discussing in one of these conferences
and they were talking about this Dassault thing.
I said, “Why, why don’t you buy the Chinese airplanes?
You can buy ten for one.”
They said, “No, no Sadhguru,
Chinese airplanes are like this,
Dassault is fantastic.”
Yes, I also looked at it.
I am also an aviator,
I am a licensed pilot,
I know what's an airplane.
I know you can't compare a Dassault to Chinese airplane
but the Chinese airplanes fly and they bomb (Laughter)
and that's all that matters –
at 1/10th of the price.
You are not going to pick a fight
with United States of America and fight a war with them.
If at all if you have a quarrel, is it with your neighbor.
Now this six hundred thousand,
I mean six hundred crores
I would suggest
I would like to suggest to the new government,
instead of buying hundred airplanes,
set up one hundred power stations,
diesel or coal fired stations in Pakistan.
Give them free power or charge them,
our companies will do it if you tell them.
And let …they they invest here,
if they invest their money here,
they’re not going to bomb you.
If you invest your money there,
you are not going to bomb them.
Small bickering will happen (Applause),
small …we like little bit of a fight at the Wagah border we can,
you know (Gestures) (Laughter)
do those things to each other.
We like to do that,
you’ve seen the (Laughs) Wagah thing.
See, look at that what Mahatma Gandhi said of all the people.
That’s amazing that he said that.
That’s the man,
that is why you need to respect him,
he is not just moral code.
That is the mind of the man, okay?
So he is talking about a strong military.
Strong military definitely needed
but the best way, instead of being prepared to fight an enemy
to eliminate the enemy.
When I say eliminate the enemy –
you can eliminate the enemy only when you eliminate your enmity.
If you buy the Chinese fighters,
you have eliminated one major enemy
or your imagined enemy, okay?
If China is not there,
Pakistan;
invest the money in Pakistan, another enemy gone.
Who else is wanting to bomb you right now, I am asking.
Nobody.
So, you can focus on what you want to do. (Applause)
I know I am making it little simplistic
but fundamentally that’s all it is
see right now what I am saying is little simplistic
there are complications to it
but those things can be sorted out.
It is not like it will happen in one day
in next ten fifteen years you can run it down
your enemity
Sadhguru: Today is the equinox
All of you know what it means in terms of the celestial equator.
That is an imaginary line drawn above the earth’s equator which is also an imaginary line
dividing this planet into northern and southern hemispheres
or that point where the magnetic field of the northern pole and the southern pole alter in different ways.
the different fields of energy,
how they behave in the northern hemisphere
and just crossing over the equator, how they behave, is entirely different.
So on this day
this celestial equator is in perfect alignment with the sun.
That means all the influences upon the planet are at an equilibrium.
The significance of equinox for the human being is
on this day the masculine and the feminine is it an even keel.
In the yogic tradition this day is seen as a day
when one has the best possibility of transcending
the limitations and the compulsions of one’s physical longings.
Transcending the lustful compulsions within the human body,
the possibility of that is at its best on this day.
Shiva sat as an ardhanari.
That is, he was half woman and half man because both are even today.
this is the day when women are on equal keel with the male .
Other days I mean they’re dominant
It's a level playing field within our own system
and whether socially, economically or otherwise
the only thing that we can provide is a level-playing field for everybody.
You cannot make people equal,
it's never going to work
but you can provide an equal opportunity.
An equal opportunity simply means a level-playing field.
Traditionally it is considered as a day that is free of prejudice.
Why it is considered as a day that is free of prejudice prejudice is
prejudice essentially arises in our minds
because we are overly identified with something.
We’re here coming down to a very basic aspect of being masculine or feminine.
If you’re too identified with being masculine you will have a masculine prejudice;
if you’re too identified being feminine you will have a feminine prejudice.
So equinox is a day to bring balance to this,
to not be identified with this or that,
not even being a man or a woman,
not even being human or another creature
just to sit here and throb.
Sadhguru: Marriage is not a commodity that you carry on your head,
but many people carry it on their head.
It’s just an arrangement,
so that socially,
there is some sense to the way you fulfill
the needs that you have.
A human being has needs –
physical,
psychological,
emotional,
financial,
social,
various kinds of needs.
To fulfill these things in a dignified manner,
we came up with something called marriage,
so that it is fulfilled within a framework,
your desires don’t run wild and disturb everything in the society,
some kind of a framework
so that it can be conducted in a sensible manner.
Now you have raised this to heaven
because somebody told you,
“Marriages are made in heaven” (Laughter).
Only the unmarried ones think so (Laughter/Applause).
So it’s just two people, all right?
Now, spiritual process is about turning inward.
Can I turn inward with somebody else (Laughs)?
Marriage is an arrangement to fulfill certain aspect of your life.
Don’t complicate life by thinking,
“We will walk together on the spiritual path.”
There is no such thing
because spiritual path is not (Laughs)
not the path that you take into the Velliangiri Mountains,
that you want to walk together.
Even if you go to Velliangiri Mountains,
please don’t walk hand-in-hand (Laughter).
It’s a narrow pathway
and it’s not an appropriate way to walk in the forest (Laughs).
You can walk in the park hand-in-hand.
You can go shopping hand-in-hand.
You can sit in a cinema hand-in-hand.
You can’t turn inward hand-in-hand (Applause).
Now, does it mean to say someone who is married,
what it ma… Let’s understand this.
Someone who is married means
someone who’s made an official arrangement for their needs in life.
A formal arrangement for simple needs that a human being has,
which are biological,
which are psychological,
which are social, many things.
So, these arrangements that you have made,
conduct these arrangements gracefully,
so there will be time and space for you to turn around.
If you pay excess attention to these arrangements,
then turning around will not be possible.
This does not mean if you are alone, you will do it.
If you are alone, you may be always looking out (Laughs).
You will spend your entire time and life looking out for somebody.
That will also not help.
If you think your desires,
your longings
and your needs can be well handled by an arrangement of marriage
all right.
Don’t try to raise it to heaven.
It doesn’t happen in heaven, believe me.
And if heaven is making so many mistakes (Laughter),
then we will have to seriously reconsider many things (Laughs).
So, of course in India,
we don’t blame it on the heaven.
We do our own calculations.
Of all the arrangements of stars and planets and everything,
we match all the planets and stars very well.
It’s very easy to match stars because they never fought ever (Laughter).
But to match these two people -
that nobody has managed,
except those two people if they are sensible (Laughs).
If they are sensible, they can manage it.
Nobody else can match these two people (Applause).
Priests have tried,
gods have tried,
ghosts and goblins have tried,
it’s not worked and not worked and not worked.
Two sensible people, they can manage.
If both of them understand the limitations of the arrangement
and the possibilities of the arrangement,
they can conduct it sensibly.
If you try to raise it to heaven,
you will see it will for sure crash.
So, your marriage has nothing to do with your spiritual process
because your spiritual process is an inward journey.
But one dimension of this is –
to walk alone, people falter.
Actually, this question was asked to Gautama the Buddha,
“Is it better to walk alone or in company?”
Gautama looked and said,
“It’s better to walk alone than to walk with a fool” (Laughs) (Applause)
because Gautama –
not me, okay (Laughter) –
Gautama believes only a fool will marry you (Laughter/Applause).
It’s him, not me, okay (Laughter)?
(Sadhguru): Mysticism does not come from the East,
it comes from within.
Before you attempt anything
that is considered as a mystical process,
it’s very important
to stabilize the five fundamental elements within us.
These are known as pancha bhutas
or maha tatwas in the yogic science.
This body,
this very earth,
the universe and the cosmos –
all, are just a play of five elements.
This body’s composition is such
that seventy-two percent of this body is water.
Approximately twelve percent is earth,
six percent is air,
four percent is fire
and the rest is space or akash.
What we call as our physiology
is something that we accumulated.
What we call as our psychological process,
the whole content for this is also accumulated
in the form of impressions.
There is substantial evidence today to show
that water has a great sense of memory
everything that happens around the body of water
is in some way stored in the water molecules
it is being referred to as a fluid computer
among the five elements
water acquires the greatest significance
because seventy two percent of this body is water.
if we take sufficient care about
the water that we consume
not just in terms of its purity
it being baceria free and those kind of things
but the way the water is kept
in what kind of container you keep it
how you keep it
how you touch it
how you approach it
because there is substantial scientific evidence today
to show you that a thought,
an emotion
a touch
these things can change the molucular structure of water
and greatly alter the way
water behaves in your system.
So one needs to understand,
you are not dealing with a commodity,
you are dealing with life-making material.
Water is life.
It is just that
right now it’s outside of you,
so before it enters your system,
how you treat it,
If you keep the water in a container which is metallic,
preferably copper or an alloy of copper,
and every day if you wash it with an organic substance
and keep the water in a place
where it is not touched by other smells
and other substances,
there is sufficient space around it
and when you approach it,
if you can just hold this vessel with your hands,
with a certain sense of gratitude and reverence -
because this is life-making material -
and then consume it,
you will see
it will do wonders within your system.
Healthfulness and equanimity will be a natural consequence of this.
Sadhguru: The soil that you walk upon
has a certain sense of intelligence and memory,
so even if you happen to live in a concrete jungle,
it is important to keep in touch with the earth
upon which you live.
Create ways for yourself to somehow
remain in touch with the soil or the earth upon which you live,
that part of the earth.
With your bare hands and bare feet,
see particularly the palms and the soles,
if they come in touch
with the earth on a daily basis
at least for a few minutes,
a certain harmonizing of the physiological process will happen,
just being in contact with the earth.
If you spend at least a few minutes in your garden
barefooted,
touching plants or trees
because this is the basis of your life.
All life,
yours and every other creature,
has come out of this earth -
stay in touch with it
and harmonize your system.
Though air represents only six percent
of your body’s elemental constitution,
it is the most dynamic part of the element
in terms of the transaction that happens
on a minute-to-minute basis.
what kind of air you breathe is definitely important
and that’s well-known,
but how you breathe
and how consciously you breathe is equally important.
Especially those of you who are living in large cities,
the kind of air that you breathe
may not be in your hands,
so it’s good at least for a few minutes,
take a walk in the park,
along the lake or the river,
or whatever is available to you.
Especially if you have children,
it is important that you take them out at least once a month,
far away enough from the city,
where nature is in reasonably pure state,
where they can climb a small hill
or walk in a forest
or swim in a river,
something natural to be in touch with nature
and to do something
where breath will be in a dynamic state.
This is not just for aerobic exercise,
because constant exchange of air is happening
from within and without
and the very intelligence in the body will take care of this,
that when it senses the air is pure and alive,
the way the body breathes is different,
you can notice this
and the exchange will happen,
cleansing will happen within the system
because breath per se is only one to two percent of the air transaction
the rest is happening in many other ways.
So if you remain in pure air,
it’s important that you bring breath to a dynamic state
with a certain activity.
You don’t have to do too vigorous an activity,
just enough to see that
you’re breathing deep enough,
slightly deeper than normal is happening to you
for a period of time.
And especially for growing children,
this becomes very important
because this will greatly enhance the body’s integrity and strength
But on a daily basis,
if you’re not able to take yourself out,
within the house
you can do a simple yogic practice called nadi shuddhi
to cleanse the breath.
Fire accounts for four percent of your elemental makeup.
What kind of fire burns within you?
Is it the fire of greed,
hatred,
resentment
anger,
lust
love,
compassion?
If you take care of that,
once again your physical and mental well-being is well taken care of.
You become an equanimous and exuberant being.
A simple process you can do
to cleanse the fire within you is
get some sunlight every day.
Fortunately,
you cannot contaminate the sunlight,
though we have contaminated every other element,
sunlight has remained pure,
make best use of that.
If you wish to use fire,
you can light a fire with an organic substance like straw or firewood,
without any oil
and stand facing the fire,
with your hands open
and keep your eyes open for three minutes,
then stand with your back to it,
exposing your spine for three minutes.
This will cleanse your aura
and bring about a new sense of resurgence in the system
This is to rekindle and reconnect the fire within
with the fires outside.
This is the basis of all fire-based rituals in the East.
If having a fire is not very practical for you,
at least a lamp with vegetable oils or ghee,
you light a lamp and be around this lamp,
first face the lamp and sit
and then turn around and sit
so that the fire element within you gets rekindled.
The fifth and the most expansive dimension
of the elemental composition is akash
or etheric space.
This has a certain intelligence.
How this akashic intelligence behaves within you
determines the nature of your life.
The nature, quality and the power of your life
essentially is determined by
how much access can you find
into the akashic intelligence.
As I said,
this is an expansive part of the elemental composition,
that means there is no limit.
There is only that much water,
there is only that much air,
that much earth
and that much fire
but the akashic dimension is a limitless possibility.
If you find access in a limitless manner,
both your perception and intelligence can grow.
One simple process you can do to find more access to akash
or the akashic intelligence is
after sunrise,
before the sun crosses a thirty degree angle,
you look up at the sky once
and bow down to akash
for holding you and this planet in place.
After the sun crosses thirty degrees,
sometime during the day,
anytime, look up and bow down again.
After the sunset,
within the forty minutes after sunset,
look up at the sky and once again bow down.
You are not bowing to any imaginary gods up there,
Just to the etheric space around us,
which is holding everything
that we are in place.
If you get the akash to co-operate with your life energies,
life will happen in magical ways.
An intelligence that you have never thought possible
will become yours.
For a human being
to have an element of grace in their lives
Shambhavi mudra is a process
that is like opening a window so that
one becomes receptive to grace
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
I have a question about grace.
I’m not sure exactly how to put it, but
Sadhguru: About what?
Questioner: Grace… grace.
Sadhguru: Grace.
Questioner: Yes.
To me it seems to be a
sort of an accidental thing.
In the sense, it comes and goes according to I don’t know what really.
I seem to lose it very easily once it’s there.
I wondered if you could talk a little bit about grace
and how it works or
Like, here in the ashram it’s very easy to access or to feel it,
but once you go outside it’s quite difficult to be connected to that energy or the grace.
If you could talk something about that.
Thank you.
Sadhguru: You’re asking me to talk about the fragrance of this flower
how to do that (Laughs)?
Only if you have a sensitive nose (Gestures smelling) – fantastic,
otherwise somebody has got their nose stuffy today (Gestures someone else to smell it) – means nothing.
So
grace means nothing to a whole lot of people.
They don’t even
It’s not that you have to think about it or you have to talk about it,
it is just that if you’re too full of yourself
only if you’re too full of yourself you can be unconscious of grace.
In the sense,
you don’t even have to go to school and know about planets and solar system and galaxies and stuff,
just as a human being if you look up,
you don’t know where this begins, where this ends.
In the middle of nowhere,
here you are sitting on a planet spinning
and see, you’re fine.
Definitely not your doing, isn’t it?
Definitely you can’t do this.
Whatever is holding all this up,
one title for it – grace.
Now, whether you’re available to it or not is the question.
When we say Grace,
we are not looking at a certain kind.
We’re looking at that which is the basis of everything,
because you do not know how this solar system is held in place,
you do not know how the whole universe is held in place,
you do not even know how you happened, really.
How so many cells are staying together and make your life happen –
you don’t really know.
You have explanations and explanations,
but you don’t know.
If you knew, you would create one right now.
If you knew exactly how, we would make it, isn’t it?
So when there is so much that you do not know,
everything is still happening great,
obviously it’s not an accident.
So whatever is making all this happen –
that energy,
that force
we call it grace.
But now the question is about making yourself available.
If you have a stuffy nose, the flower means nothing to you.
If you’re blind, light means nothing to you.
If you’re insensitive, nothing means anything to you.
So it is a question of becoming sensitive.
Most people are ego-sensitive,
they’re not life sensitive.
Right now you have to be cautious about what to say and what not to say to a whole lot of people
because they’re horribly ego-sensitive;
for everything they will crash within themselves.
First of all,
you create one illusion,
then you create another illusion of it falling and rising;
it’s a very bad game.
You must be disillusioned soon.
If you’re truly disillusioned, absolutely,
you will always be available to grace.
If you have no illusions of your own,
you will wonder about everything.
How can you not wonder about everything,
about your very existence?
If you have no conclusions in your mind about anything,
simply here,
you will be soaked in Grace.
Even now you are,
but you cannot enjoy it unless you’re conscious, that’s all.
It will not work for you because you’re not conscious.
It is working for you,
but still you cannot fully benefit from that.
See, it is a fact,
a medically established fact,
if two people eat the same food,
both of them will not get the same nourishment.
Exactly same food two people eat,
they will not get the same level of nourishment
because it depends on your ability to draw sustenance from that.
So to develop this capability
All of us are in grace,
but to develop the capability to draw sustenance from that
so that this life becomes an expression of that grace.
See
You know, if you have smelled this flower (Gestures) –
this is typical to southern India –
phenomenally fragrant –
you think our garden department is pouring fragrance at the roots?
No,
they’re putting filth, believe me.
Yes
Even if you put filth,
see how fantastic it became
because that’s its nature.
Because it does that, we’re planting the tree, nurturing it, taking care of it,
everybody’s concerned how it is growing.
Suppose it was giving out a smell that was unpleasant to you,
suppose it just took the filth and threw out the filth through the flower
no,
we would have taken it out, isn’t it?
So, grace brings many benefits.
Once you’re exuding grace, everybody wants to nurture it,
everybody wants to promote it,
everybody wants to be a part of it because you’re exuding grace.
Now, the question is not at all about whether you’re in grace or not.
You are, otherwise you cannot exist.
The question is only about are you exuding Grace or
are you transforming in… this into something nasty and letting it out on everybody?
Let me tell you a very well-known story in India.
It’s a folklore,
just about everybody in the country (Laughs) should know this story probably.
There was a sage living in a jungle, blind of vision – he has no vision,
simply sitting in one place.
Rarely people pass this way. When they pass this way they give him something and he lives by that
no vision.
One day it so happened the king and his retinue of soldiers and ministers, whatever,
they all went out hunting.
In the hunt, in chasing a deer, a spotted deer,
they lost their way and the king got lost, separated from the group,
because, you know, the king has the… fastest horse (Laughs).
The best one he rides, so he went away ahead of them and got lost.
They were all searching, searching, they all got lost.
And then the soldier came and asked the sage,
“Did you see the king?”
He said, “No.”
Then a commander came and asked, “Did you see?”
He said, “No.”
Then the minister came and asked, “Did you see?”
“No.”
Then the king himself came there,
then the blind sage immediately recognized he’s the king,
“Oh, your people have been looking for you.
First… your soldier came, then your commander came, then your minister came.”
The king observed and saw that the person was blind and then he asked,
“Oh, Divine being, how do you know that first it was a soldier, then the commander, then the minister?”
The sage said, “Well, the first one who came said, ‘Hey, blind one!
Did you see our king coming here? Did you… Did anybody come this way?’”
So I knew he must be your soldier.
The second one spoke with authority but without respect,
I knew he must be one of your officers.
The third one, the minister came,
he spoke with great respect so I thought he must be your minister.
Now you came, now you touch my feet and… refer to me as the Divine one
you must be the king.” (Laughs)
Whether you eat food or breathe or drink water, anything – it is Grace,
otherwise, how (Laughs)?
Two parts of hydrogen and one part of oxygen becomes life-making water –
this is Grace.
Okay, you can give it an explanation,
but you don’t know why this should happen, isn’t it?
All that is happening is grace.
Now you drink this or you eat this or you breathe this,
will you also exude grace?
Because you conceive… you… you consumed Grace,
you must also conceive grace and exude grace, isn’t it?
But unfortunately people take in fantastic things into themselves,
turn it into nasty nonsense and lets it out.
But look at the tree – you give it filth, it gives out fragrance.
It’s time
If you learn the way of the tree,
if you learn the way of the rock,
you will exude grace.
So the question is not whether you’re in grace or not –
definitely every creature is in grace –
are you capable of exuding the grace that you consume?
That’s the question.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: Sadhguru, it’s a great opportunity and an honor for me to interact with you.
In many ways there can’t be a greater contrast between two individuals
Sadhguru: At least in appearance we are.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: You grew up in a very urban and sophisticated background.
I grew up in a village in Telugu medium.
And you’re in the spiritual realm and I’m anything but spiritual,
I’m in the completely temporal realm.
I built all my life around principles of rationality and logic.
When you are a person of religion,
you’re given certain edicts
what is good, what is bad, the ten commandments, the do’s and the don’ts,
but in ordinary life for most people,
particularly in the public domain,
to distinguish between good and bad seems to be increasingly difficult.
I’ve always held that there are two realms
the individual, individual gain and the second is the public good.
If one is clashing with the other,
if my personal gain is clashing with the public good, then that is something bad;
if both are in harmony, then that is something good.
That seems to me a workable definition of what is good and bad
for ordinary interaction between the citizen or individual and the community and the society.
What are your thoughts on that?
Sadhguru: See, once you start a debate as to what is good and what is bad,
this debate can go on forever without coming to a conclusion.
Obviously you’ve debated this within yourself and around yourself for many years
and still there is no conclusion.
And believe me,
people have been debating this for thousands of years
and still there is no conclusion.
essentially it boils down to this
‘What I do is good, what you do is bad.’
That extends to the society, to politics to various things.
Whoever is in a position of power is in a position of dominance,
they may not spell it out so crudely
but in so many ways they’re telling you, what I do is right, what you do is wrong.
So ultimately it becomes about
whoever is in a state of advantage is right,
whoever is in a state of disadvantage is wrong.
Well, that principle is the basis of all exploitation
and all the ugliness that you see on the planet.
So instead of starting a debate on what is good and what is bad,
I think what we need is
what is appropriate and what is inappropriate to our times,
to our society,
to our existence here,
to our level of economics.
What is right and… what is appropriate and what is inappropriate?
Tomorrow if our conditions change, the appropriateness changes.
Then there will be no clashes.
Constantly the clash between the previous generation and this generation,
between one human being and the other human being is
your ideas of right and his ideas of right are so different.
Parents and children are fighting,
administration and people are fighting,
management and union is fighting
simply because your ideas of good and bad are very different and it's always different.
Within the family between the husband and the wife,
basic unit of the family,
their ideas of right and wrong are very different.
So, once you enter that space,
you’re entering into an endless controversy,
no possibility of a solution.
But if you look at appropriateness of action,
then we can arrive at what is the appropriate thing to do in our society,
for our conditions,
for our limitations.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: Sadhguru, that brings me to the question of
ensuring that the moral conduct is actually upheld,
while spiritual gurus, religion itself and society norms have a value,
they don’t seem to be sufficient.
Only in India, whenever you talk about corruption or some other misconduct in public life or private life,
we talk of morality and values instead of talking about institutional
Sadhguru: No, as far as I’m concerned there is no corruption in India.
Where is corruption in India?
There is only banditry.
I don’t see any corruption.
Because corruption means you come to me and you want a favor to be done,
I’m willing to do it, but, you know, under the table I want two rupees from you.
This is corruption.
I break your head and I take everything that you have, this is not corruption.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: So when we talk of all these evils in public domain,
often times we talk about values in this country
rather than enforcing a certain code of conduct.
Unless the laws of the land,
unless the enforcement mechanism is strong enough
to enforce a certain code of conduct and prove that there is punishment for bad behavior
and reward for good behavior,
I’m afraid values in themselves will not for long sustain us.
Sadhguru: Not at all.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: No. This is something that we need to get from you
because over emphasis and values at the cost of institutions
sometimes may actually become an excuse for doing nothing to build institutions.
what institutional mechanisms we need to build
in your estimate to build higher levels of public integrity,
higher levels of civic conduct?
Sadhguru: See, one important thing that India needs to do
is to simplify the laws in a way that everybody understands it.
Right now, it’s so, so complex and so ambiguous,
nobody really knows what it is.
And because there is so much ambiguity,
it creates so much grey areas which breeds corruption endlessly.
If there is no ambiguity, somebody just couldn’t come and ask money out of me to do some work, isn’t it?
There is so much ambiguity.
These laws were largely created by the English because they wanted ambiguity,
so that they could interpret it whichever way they want.
If they want to pick you up tomorrow morning,
they want to pick you up and there is a good enough reason.
We have still kept the same laws and even today it is true,
the law can just come and pick you or me up now
and I don’t know what I have done
but they can pick you up and they can produce something number whatever criminal procedure code,
some damn number that I’m not aware of
and they can say you did this
because it's such an ambiguous law.
This is good to control foreign nations if you occupy them;
not for our nation to move ahead.
Too much ambiguity.
you can see million examples like this in the country
where laws are unnecessarily complicated and ambiguous,
which is essentially breeding ground for corruption.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: Now Sadhguru, I hear you saying that
a) the cultural ambience in which you live, that matters about the appropriateness and
b) it changes from time to time, generation to generation.
In other words, people sometimes confuse taboos with morals,
the changing fashions and attitudes of morals.
But unless we have some kind of a yardstick which is measureable and somewhat universal
in guiding our behavior and dealing with the society at large,
or perhaps even in nature,
how are we going to give people a yardstick other than religious edicts
that is the challenge for many agnosts
because we can’t go by the Ten Commandments merely
because God gave us those.
We can’t go by the Gita because Lord Vishnu told us so.
We need a temporal yardstick,
we need an institutional mechanism to be able to measure and say
this is right, this is wrong - a talisman.
Sadhguru: Trying to fix the human societies with morality
will only bring more and more deception.
And above all, it kills life in so many different ways.
Why are we trying to fix life with morality?
Essentially because we have never bothered to stir up humanity.
There is something called as humanity within us.
If you stir up this dimension which we call as humanity,
when somebody is feeling very human,
he doesn’t need morality.
He will be fine the way he is.
But instead of being a human being,
he becomes a Christian
or a Hindu
or a Muslim
or an Indian
or a Pakistani
or this or that or some many things
caste, creed and many, many things.
So instead of a human identity he takes on a different identity.
Now you can do most horrible things with great pride.
Yes.
You can kill thousands, not one;
you can kill thousands and feel really good about it.
I did it because ‘I did it for the nation’,
‘I did it for my religion’,
‘I did it for my caste, creed’, whatever else.
So your identity is shifting from your fundamental identity to make-believe identities,
it may serve limited purpose.
We’re a nation because we have to politically manage ourselves.
It is not some divine dictum that this is a nation like this.
We are the people who drew the lines, isn’t it?
Now we believe that’s how it is.
For certain functional realities we draw lines,
but that is not the reality.
So a human being should essentially be identified as a human being,
not by his religion,
not by his race,
not by his caste, creed, nationality,
no.
If he sits here as a human being,
you don’t
you will see he does not need morality.
He will be fine.
And that’s what is needed in the society, to stir up humanity,
not morality.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: That’s a terrific message, Sadhguru.
Essentially what you’re advocating is that
go beyond the individual,
go beyond the sect and the creed
and embrace humanity itself
and you will not go wrong in actions
Sadhguru: I’m not saying embrace humanity.
I’m saying you are human, isn’t it?
I don’t have to teach you to be human; you are human.
The problem is somebody else has taught you that you are something else.
Somebody else has told you, you’re Indian.
Somebody else has told you you’re Hindu.
Somebody else has told you you’re Muslim,
but the reality is you’re human.
if you travel hundred kilometers in India,
people look different,
they dress differently,
they speak differently,
different languages,
our food is different, everything is different.
But still for over ten thousand years,
the whole world has referred to us as one nation.
Though we were over two hundred political entities at some time,
still,
you know we’ve been doing trade with Syria, Jerusalem, Damascus, Jerusalem, Greece
all these places for over 8,000, 10,000 years.
Even at those times, they referred to this country as Hindustan
though there were two hundred entities.
It was referred to as one nation as Bharatvarsh or Hindustan or whatever the name,
because somewhere people saw this as one nation
though it was ruled by many kings
because there was one ethos
which is something that the politicians and administrators and the people have never paid attention to.
The only thing which keeps us as one nation is a certain fundamental spiritual ethos
which is not on the surface but which is always there.
In the sense,
people recognize this as one nation from outside
because they all believed in something.
This nation has never been a nation of believers.
We have been a nation of seekers
because spiritual process has been the main thing.
Here, people are not believing in God,
they’re seeking mukti or liberation or freedom.
There is a difference between a seeker and a believer.
A believer means he’s made a conclusion.
A seeker means he’s wide open.
He’s… he’s realized that he does not know that’s why he’s seeking.
This one quality set us apart from the rest of the world,
so outside world recognized as one nation,
though there were so many political entities.
We need to understand even today,
it is only this spiritual thread which is keeping this as one nation.
If you… right now it’s being systematically hacked at.
If you break this one thing,
after twenty five, thirty years,
you will wonder why are we one nation and we will break.
If you do not strengthen the fundamental spiritual ethos of this nation,
if you hack it down with beliefs and other kinds of identities,
you will see
you will break up into various nations,
you will not be one nation.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: Sadhguru, I hear you clearly
and I entirely agree with you that unless unity and order are kept even above liberty if necessary,
if there is a clash, we’re in danger.
(Sadhguru): This is the reality of existence.
If you sit here as a piece of life,
you instantly know that there is nothing in the existence with which you’re not connected.
essential dimension of spiritual process is
that you dis-identify yourself with all the false identities you’ve taken on
and to learn to sit here just as a piece of life.
If you sit here as a piece of life and throb as a piece of life,
breathe as a piece of life;
you know this happened a few years ago
because you mentioned this Project Green Hands I’m bringing this on.
When I said that we need to plant a 114 million trees
to get Tamil Nadu to thirty three percent green cover,
people said, ‘Sadhguru, do you know what is 114 million?
Is it possible for any human being to plant this many?’
See, I told them,
the population of Tamil Nadu is 62 million people.
If all of us plant one tree, take care of it for two years
and plant one more tree, what is the number - you got it.
Now the problem is that they must feel for it.
How do you do it?
I told them you don’t worry.
I went out village to village,
called Farmers Associations together,
I told them one simple thing - just sit here,
where do you want to sit in the sun or under the tree?
Choose.
You know what is the choice.
Everybody sits under the tree.
Now I said, see, are you breathing?
Yes.
I want you to understand what you exhale, the tree is inhaling.
What the tree is exhaling, you’re inhaling.
Just sit here and feel it, it’s happening.
One half of your lungs is hanging out there,
It just caught like a fire.
We’ve not planted 114 million trees,
but 17 million trees
and Tamil Nadu’s green cover has officially gone up by 7.2 percent
and we didn’t give up our lives to do this,
this is just one of the small things we do.
Just that if everybody gets involved, it’s a small job, isn’t it?
Why are they not getting involved? Because they’re identified with something.
If they sat here as a piece of life, nobody had to tell them.
They would have anyway done it by themselves.
So, it is because of these wrong identifications
that we’re doing all these crazy things and you’re trying to fix it with morality.
It’s not going to work.
It’s not worked for these thousands of years, isn’t it?
Sadhguru: There are whole lot of things being said about golf.
What is unique about the game is
if you play any other game,
the ball is coming at you from different angles, velocities, spin
Interviewer: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Here it’s just sitting.
You’ve got to hit a sitting ball
So one important thing is whatever you do, it’s just you,
there is simply no other factor involved.
That’s what makes you look so dumb,
that’s what makes it so challenging, interesting and exciting,
because just to even understand the limitations of just being able to hit a sitting ball,
just a sitting ball
And the possibility is also this
whoever is the world champion right now,
if you or me play a game with him,
we may beat him on one or two holes, which you can’t do in any other game
in any other game. If you try to play soccer with Messi,
you won’t get to touch the ball at all.
Even if you try to play cricket,
they can bowl in such a way that you’ll never get to touch the ball.
This is one game where you can play level with the top
Whatever is the top,
you can play level with them at least in spots.
If not… The only thing is they got consistency, which you may not have
because you’ve put in the same amount of time and whatever.
So the most significant aspect for me… for me was,
one thing is you can play this game without injuries,
which is important for me.
I played all kinds of games but
it became important to play a game without injury
because three hundred and sixty five days I have a schedule.
Injuries are something that I can’t – it’s a luxury I can’t afford
That’s one thing.
But once you start playing it, there’re many intricacies.
One of the most important and significant things for me is
for me right from my childhood,
the geometry of the Existence has always been the most important part.
And when I say geometry,
if I look at a tree – well,
I see the colors and stuff but for me
the most exciting and the first thing that I notice is the geometry of how it stands.
In nature, unless some kind of integrity of geometry is there,
nothing stands by itself.
The whole system of yoga is just this
just getting the geometry of this human system right.
Today there is a whole science called the Constructional Theory
where they’re
they’ve gone about pointing out how
whether you take an atom or a human being or a grasshopper or an earthworm or the Cosmos,
at the most fundamental level the design is common.
From that common design it has evolved into such complex possibilities,
but the fundamental design is common.
In all this, geometry is the thing.
In golf as in yoga, geometry is most important.
You don’t know how to stand right, you may take years to just stand right.
So I have never taken a lesson,
I’ve never been on a driving range,
I’m doing quite good.
It’s basically geometry and your ability to gauge how things are
the terrain, the distances and exerting the right amount of swing and force.
So for me that became the most important factor.
I thoroughly enjoy the complexity of geometry involved.
And unless you figure the geometry right,
you will miss your three foot putt
Sadhguru: So, has creation done its job? (Laughter)
So, one half of the statement is right;
no contradiction about that.
Have you done your job?
No, so the other part is also right.
At the same time I’m saying, be in upasana,
because your role in the existence is so small.
Everything that happens to you largely is being done to you.
Are you spinning the planet?
No.
Could you live if it did not spin?
Could you live?
No.
Are you managing the atmosphere?
No, you’re spoiling it, but you’re not managing it, isn't it?
Are you making your heart beat?
No.
Are you breathing?
Everything that’s vital to life is happening, isn't it?
Your business is just to become receptive to the bounty of life;
to know life in its fullest way.
If you’re willing to be blissful, joyful,
do something worthwhile about yourself,
or you’re willing to do something worthwhile about ten people around you,
we will take care of your living also.
All you have to do is (Gestures bowing down).
To whom?
Just the creation.
Isn’t it big enough to bow down?
Isn't it big enough to bow down?
Just the creation.
On top of that you want one more thing?
Isn't creation itself big enough to bow down I’m asking.
Isn't the mountain big enough to bow down?
I find even the tree and a ant big enough to bow down
because not one of them can we figure.
With all your intelligence,
you can’t figure a leaf upon this tree
one leaf!
So, just the sheer intelligence of everything that is happening;
when you can’t figure anything what do you do? (Gestures)
That’s all I said.
Stay in upasana,
because anyway your role is so minor in this existence
that tomorrow morning if you evaporate
no problem.
Only if you leave your mess here and go, problem,
but if you simply evaporate there’s no problem for anybody, isn't it?
Yes or no?
So your role in your own life is so minor,
so very minor;
everything is being done to you,
just everything.
So, how can you be the hero?
When you have a two-bit role,
if you think you are a hero you’re making a serious mistake, isn't it?
That’s all I’m talking about.
I am not talking about doing any great spiritual sadhana,
but if you are… if you live in truth, that is a sadhana, what else?
To stop the lies that you’re creating, that is all the sadhana.
Searching for truth,
knowing truth, does not mean you have to go in search of it somewhere.
It’s not hiding behind the mountain;
it’s on this side, you know. (Laughs)
Right now, this part of the planet is dark,
so will you go looking on the other side?
No, it’s here.
Truth means just this;
whatever there is, is truth.
Whatever you have made up is a lie.
That’s all there is, isn't it?
And you being a hero in this existence, is your rubbish.
It’s got nothing to do with reality.
So if you understand that
you understand you have a very minor role in the existence
not just in the making of the existence, in your own life.
Even if something as simple as breath or heartbeat is left in your hand,
you will be a complete mess within a minute.
Yes or no?
So I’m not saying anything new.
Not a teaching,
just reminding you the reality of what your life is
and that’s all living in truth means
that you’ve not made up anything.
You’re not writing your own story;
you’re… you are trying to live life.
If you live life, you can only live it the way it is.
Only if you make up a story you can make your own story, isn't it?
If you are doing fiction you can make it up the way you want.
If you’re living life, you can live life only the way it is;
there is no other way to live.
So do not think it’s some kind of a teaching.
That’s how life is.
Just live it;
don’t make up any story.
If you make up a story which is not true and believe it is true,
when your script comes to an end,
then you’ll be at a loss, because (Laughs)
there is nothing.
If you go with reality,
it is on whether you are alive or dead; it’s on.
You being with it is the safest way to be, best way to be.
That’s the only way you can experience life.
Otherwise you will experience the treachery of your own words,
nothing else
The idea that we need to protect this planet
Itself is a convoluted idea because - it is not because of us, that the planet is there; it is because of the planet
We are there
Even to think me and the Planet
Is a completely wrong notion because what you call as myself the physical presence of who you are
Is just an outcrop of this planet? Whatever you experience as a part of yourself
With that nobody has to tell you please take care of [that] anywhere, you will take care of it
The planet is for all of us and they cannot exist here by ourselves
Our existence here is not because of our economic activity right now
[we] are made [to] believe it is because [of] the percentages of growth that's happening in this country you will live well
[no], we will live well here if everything is green beautiful water is flowing air is pure
We will live well here this idea has to go into every human beings mind if every citizens mind into every child's mind
You must always be conscious of their life other than human life
Most people [are] not even conscious of the human beings so I am reminding you
You must be conscious of everything that is alive a tree a plant a blade of grass [a] grasshopper
Hopping you [must] be an eye to everything
Constantly the air around us is entering us and coming out of us and this is the basis of our life what you exhale
The trees are inhaling
What does these exhale you are inhaling?
Did the constant transaction going on if we stop this process of breath for one minute?
We understand that without sense acting with the air around us. We cannot live for a moment
similarly on the level of water and on the level of
This transaction is going on so how we keep the atmosphere around us the water bodies around us
Will Determine the nature and the quality of our life?
Manisha Koirala: The other question, which I want to ask, Guruji, is
pertaining to this calm in clamor
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement).
Manisha Koirala: …which is about
In today’s world, with so much happening,
life throwing constant challenges,
whether it's health-related,
whether it's relationship-related,
whether it's career demands
and constant struggle –
let's forget the bigger terrorism
and all that news –
but in our own personal day-to-day life,
there’s so much of pressure,
there’s so much of challenges that we face.
How do we (Sadhguru laughs)
keep calm amidst so much of chaos?
Sadhguru: Anyway,
let me put this to context.
Life… Even though
a lot of organization needs to happen in our country,
never before life was as organized as it is today.
You’re talking about relationships,
problems
and you know, uncertainties.
I want you to know,
if you lived here a 1000 years ago,
if your man
or your child went out,
you never know whether they’ll come back or not,
okay?
There is always a tiger lurking right there,
there is always an elephant (Laughs) wanting to stamp him.
And he did not go out
If he went out for two days,
you sat here, praying,
wanting him to come back
because he didn’t Whatsapp you
and tell you every step of what he is doing (Both laugh),
he just vanished.
He just vanished for days or months.
You never know whether he’s going to come back or not,
every time he stepped out.
Not for war,
even for business,
even for work,
if he went out, you don’t know
whether he will come back.
For the first time, you can keep track of him (Both laugh).
So I’m saying (Laughs)
life is more certain than ever before.
We have just become less competent to handle.
If you had to navigate your way through the jungle,
it was different.
Today, navigating through the Delhi traffic,
there is road rage. Yesterday, today,
some incidents are there,
people are killing each other.
People are killing each other
just because they’re not able to handle the traffic chaos.
I can imagine,
if I left you in a rainforest,
I can imagine the terror you’ll go through
because you won't know a thing
about how to navigate.
Every moment, you have to be alert
and find your way.
There is no traffic policeman pointing
this way or that way for you.
When to stop, when to go,
somebody has to tell you now.
Then, if you didn’t stop at the right time,
you would be dead (Laughs).
I’m saying life is more organized than ever before on this planet.
Don’t complain.
You have more comforts,
more conveniences than any generation ever had.
Yes or no?
Please, all of you.
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Aren’t you enjoying more material comfort
than your parents and your grandparents,
unless your grandfather was a maharaja or something (Laughter)?
Manisha Koirala: Don’t look at me (Referring to the fact that she belongs to the royal family of Nepal) (Laughter).
Sadhguru: We… We
Life is better than ever before
but we have lost the ability within ourselves
because somewhere, we think
by fixing the outside, everything will be okay.
No, by fixing the outside,
comfort will come,
convenience will come,
well-being will not come.
If you’re seeking well-being,
in is the only way out.
If you lose the ability to look inward,
then clamor will be there on the outside.
Clamor is good on the outside.
Why I’m saying clamor is good is,
suppose you are running an industry –
I’m sure many of you’re running some industry
or business
or whatever –
in your industry,
you want clamor or you want silence?
Hello?
Participants: Clamor.
Sadhguru: You want clamor.
They love the clamor, do you understand?
Suppose tomorrow morning they walked into the industry,
everything is quiet.
Oh, that’s terror for them (Both laugh).
They don’t want calm in their industry.
So we must understand,
these are two different dimensions.
One is external situation,
another is inner situation.
Calm is of inner nature.
Clamor is of the material world.
More clamor,
better we’re doing, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: More clamor,
better we’re doing.
Yesterday, somebody is telling me,
“Sadhguru, no development is happening.
Prime Minister is going on saying things will happen.
Nothing is happening.
Only thing that’s happening is more pollution.”
I said,
“More pollution means something is happening” (Laughter).
Yes or no?
More pollution means more people are driving,
more machines are working,
something is happening.
Only thing is we have to see
how to make it conducive for our lives, that’s different.
But more pollution means something is happening, isn't it?
If nothing is happening,
there’ll be no pollution.
Yes (Laughs)?
If all your industries, businesses,
everything come to a standstill,
of course pollution will come down.
But that’s not the way
you want it to come down, isn't it?
You want clamor on the outside.
And calm is of your nature.
But you have never explored
what is the nature of “who I am” –
in the sense,
people are thinking
by fixing this, this, this,
this (Referring to oneself) will be okay.
No,
we can put you in a palace,
you can still be miserable.
People have hung themselves in extreme poverty.
People have hung themselves in palaces too,
isn't it?
So, creating a palace
or extreme comfort levels
does not mean you will be okay.
You will be okay only when you know,
understand
and handle the mechanics of this life (Referring to oneself) properly.
As… You know, all of you running industry and business,
you understand,
unless you understand the mechanics of
what is happening in your business,
you can't run it well.
It's only by accident.
Similarly with this (Referring to oneself),
unless you understand and conduct this properly,
you will not know what this is – only by accident.
When you’re happy or peaceful by accident,
then you will lose it on the road (Laughs).
Delhi streets are testing (Both laugh).
Questioner: Namaskaram sadhguru
Saligramam is a special kind of stone;
they say you can consecrate it in a different way.
Is there any specification,
like what kinds of materials we can use for such kinds of practices
or consecrations
and what is the specific,
this thing, of saligram?
Sadhguru: Saligram,
generally what you find in the stores is
mostly an egg-shaped stone.
Children who could not buy marbles used to pick stones in the rivers
and play games with it, you know.
Yes?
Children who can't buy glass marbles went to the river
and picked up round shaped stones and started playing with it
and somebody made the… a simple game a very serious thing.
So, most of the saligram that you see are just stones without any particular
they're just nice stones.
I hope people start… stop picking them from the river beds
because at this rate
I was telling them when we went to Kailash,
everybody wants to pick up a stone.
There was a time when people were walking from here,
from Tamil Nadu people walked all the way to Kailash.
If ten people started off,
only two people came back.
At that time it was okay for those people to bring two small pieces of stone
all the way because anyway they wouldn’t bring this big (Gestures) stone
carrying… walking all the way back. They brought two small stones
for the eight people that they left back there;
that was okay.
Now you're going in vehicles very comfortably
and you want to load up bagfuls of stones and come home,
at this rate, I was just telling them, ‘If this happens,
in a few years the whole of Kailash will be in Tamil Nadu.’ (Laughter)
We're transporting the whole mountain piece by piece (Laughter);
the number of people that are going
and we are planning to take thousands of people.
So, please leave the Kailash stones in Kailash,
it's no good for you. (Laughs)
You want to carry some water, it's okay.
Water migrates without your permission.
Stones still don’t migrate.
So, wherever these stones are from, Ganga, Yamuna, wherever,
if you’ve picked them up, please carry it all the way back
and throw it back into the same river
because if the life in that river has to happen,
all these things are needed.
Saligram is particular kind of stone which is extremely rare to find.
Generally ___ sea anemones are being sold as saligrams.
Any piece of stone is being sold as saligram;
those are not saligrams.
Or people are molding them in various kind of resins and selling them;
definitely that is not saligram.
Saligram is a rare piece of stone which
which is one in a billion if you manage to pick it.
And even if you pick it,
you may not know the difference unless you're of a certain kind.
And if you happen to pick a genuine saligram
If you do happen to pick a genuine saligram,
then you're in real trouble
because you should know how to manage this,
otherwise you'll be in lot of trouble.
It can also make your life if you know how to use it.
It’s a great treasure if you know how to use it,
otherwise it can be disastrous if you do not know how to use it.
People who are living in family situations,
simple lives without much discipline,
without much focus,
without much awareness should never ever keep a saligram in their home.
If they do they could go through any amount of turmoil.
We have seen such families.
Somebody, you know,
two-three generations ago your grandmother, grandfather,
somebody brought a saligram, they… they made their life out of it
but after they died
the next generation do not know how to keep it
and those families go through such turmoil and such horrors
which are unimaginable
because they simply do not know how to manage the energy.
It is like you have a powerhouse,
you have a power generating source in your house
and you don’t know how to manage the energy
and you will be constantly in trouble, isn't it?
Whatever you touch, you will be in trouble.
So, this is just like that; it's a tremendous power store house of energy.
It is like a mini cosmos.
It is a micro cosmos in its own way
because it carries the same type of energy as cosmos would in its magnified version.
So, this thing about seeking ekamukhi,
seeking saligrams,
please leave these things alone;
this is not genuine spiritual process,
this is souvenir collection,
you know, wherever you go you want to pick up something
and think this is sacred, that is sacred.
Everybody wants a ekamukhi
you yourself have many faces. (Laughter)
When you have many faces, if you wear a ekamukhi you're asking for trouble.
If your whole life is just one pointed and then you wear it,
it's a great thing.
Your life is going in different directions,
you're playing many roles,
you have different faces for different people that you see in your life
don’t you?
Don’t you have many faces? I'm asking.
When you have many faces, if you wear a ekamukhi
you're looking for trouble;
just like that.
Stop looking for these fanciful things.
There is something that you can do with this one (Referring to oneself);
let’s do that,
instead of going about looking for fancy pieces of something in a riverbed
or on a tree or wherever else, leave them.
If you deserve such things, it will come to you somehow,
but I don’t think you need them right now.
Devi Shetty: Sadhguru,
majority of the people who fall sick,
it’s primarily because
they led a life which would definitely land them in trouble.
But thousands of children are born in this country,
like any other part of the world with cardiac problem,
with cancer,
all kinds of problem.
it is not their fault.
Why it happens?
It shouldn’t have happened.
Sadhguru: You know six million Toyota cars were withdrawn last year for defective whatever
and about nine million General Motors withdrawn for ignition problems
Devi Shetty: It’s a manufacturing defect.
Sadhguru: Only… only problem is, you can’t withdraw them (Few laugh).
Actually nature is trying to withdraw them,
we are not allowing it.
There was a time we would allow the nature to withdraw.
Yes?
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: All the manufacturing defects that came,
hundred- two hundred years ago we would allow the nature to withdraw.
By the time children are four,
only the fittest would survive, rest would go.
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: Now we don’t allow them to withdraw,
so we need a whole lot of things to run the defective cars.
I know, I’m putting it so blatantly
but you need to understand
physical, the physical existence is mechanical.
Whether you like it or you don’t like it
probably all kinds of sensitivities and emotions are there about this “my physical body”
but when they come to you,
you strip them down and treat them like a machine, isn’t it?
complex, sophisticated but still mechanical, isn’t it?
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: There are other aspects to it
but fundamentally mechanical.
Anything mechanical,
anything physical
there is never something called as perfection to it.
It is a constant work in progress,
you can improve it and improve it and improve it.
What we call as evolutionary thing is just that.
Now the parents,
the two machines which produced this small machine
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: …okay, what condition are they in,
this is also an issue which we’ve not taken care of.
There are
there is a lot to be said which is controversial about this
but essentially this idea that
everybody must have children has to go.
Yeah, I know I’m getting into trouble (Laughter).
But we… we are not seeing humanity as a future possibility,
we’re just seeing it as a regressive way of something that
we can extend into future of our own - a footprint.
Right now that's the problem
our identification with the body is so strong,
the physical body is so strong,
we are unable to think beyond our biological identity.
Once you’re not able to think beyond your biological identity,
the very nature of being human,
the immensity of being a human is constrained and constipated into a very small process.
In this process there are problems.
In the ancient past they handled this in many different ways
which are absolutely, utterly controversial today and can never be brought back into this society
but they did handle things in a completely different way.
They’re bred carefully, which is very important.
We’re thinking about… when it comes to animal husbandry,
we’re thinking of breeding right,
as human beings why are we not thinking of breeding right? (Few Laugh)
Because we are too identified with our own body.
“It’s mine” is more important than what’s right
and the level of suffering that you bring into this fresh life,
you know, you see it every day.
Yoga for inner exploration Samba Mantra
in the history of humanity
many truly scintillating human beings have happened
They have shone brighter than the stars in the sky
But why is it that?
one seems to have come with enormous capability and
Why is it another has to struggle with every little aspect of life if you consider yourself to [be] a mechanism?
You have a body and a [mind] you
[may] have a great body and a great mind, but what you call as grace is the lubrication
Without the necessary lubrication you get stuck at every point
Any number of people like this are there on this planet?
Intelligent capable but at every corner in their life. They get stuck because there is no lubrication
So it is important for a human being to have an element of grace in their lives
Shambhavi mudra is a process that is like opening a window so that one becomes receptive to grace
Here are a few guidelines that will set optimal conditions and greatly enhance your receptivity of the practices
Please ensure cell phones are either in silent mode or switched off
it is advisable not to sit for the program with a full stomach or
Immediately after a meal
please sit with your spine comfortably erect and
uncrossed and palms open
These conditions will prepare you to be in a heightened state a receptivity and derive the most benefits on the practices
These practices are very safe and simple and can [be] done by anybody
Make sure to do everything slowly and gently and according to the instructions
if you're feeling any pain or discomfort
Stop and consult a doctor
The practices we'll be learning here can be done by anyone ages 7 years and above
If you wear glasses while doing the yoga practices, please remove them and keep them aside
Sit comfortably in a [cross-leg] posture keep your spine comfortably erect
We will hold yoga mudra
Make the thumb and the [index] finger [come] together the very tips forming a circle between them
Let the other three fingers be straight all the four fingers together without any gap between them
Holding the mudra facing upwards upon your [thigh] arms and shoulders should be loose and relaxed
Close your eyes and sit with a slightly upturned face
When you sit with your face slightly upturned
There is a natural focus between your eyebrows
maintain this natural focus do not concentrate
Just maintain this natural focus between your eyebrows and sit with your face slightly upturned eyes
closed
maintain this gentle and casual focus between the eyebrows and be
conscious of the Natural moment of Breath
Continue to sit [like] this for three to six minutes
you go to
Bogota
ah
Some good at all ah some
Davina
Yes, your [brahm] honey Rom attach it
Yet your [brom] honey [rama] touch it
none dirty none dirty None dirt ever
None dirty none dirty none
[you]
Take your own time take your own time slowly very slowly open your eyes
mysticism does not come from the east it comes from within
Before you attempt anything that is considered [as] a mystical process
It's very important to stabilize the five fundamental elements within us
(Questioner): Sadhguru you have said ‘creation has done its job;
now it’s your job to live the life.
It’s not… it’s… rather than looking up’
but you have also said ‘Upasana’
you should be side role, not main role’
but these two things are contradictory...
it seems contradicting to me at least.
How is this?
(Sadhguru): So, has creation done its job?
So one half of the statement is right;
no contradiction about that.
Have you done your job?
No, so the other part is also right.
At the same time I’m saying be in Upasana
because your role in the existence is so small.
Everything that happens to you largely is being done to you.
Are you spinning the planet?
No.
Could you live if it did not spin?
Could you live?
No.
Are you managing the atmosphere?
No, you’re spoiling it but you’re not managing it, isn't it?
Are you making your heart beat?
No.
Are you breathing?
Everything that’s vital to life is happening, isn't it?
Your business is just to become receptive to the bounty of life;
to know life in its fullest way.
If you’re willing to be blissful,
joyful,
do something worthwhile about yourself
or you’re willing to do something worthwhile about ten people around you;
we will take care of your living also.
All you have to do is to whom?
Just the creation.
Isn’t it big enough to bow down?
Isn't it big enough to bow down?
Just the creation.
On top of that you want one more thing?
Isn't creation itself big enough to bow down I’m asking.
Isn't the mountain big enough to bow down?
I find even the tree and a ant big enough to bow down
because not one of them can we figure.
With all your intelligence you can’t figure a leaf upon this tree,
one leaf.
So, just the sheer intelligence of everything that is happening;
when you can’t figure anything what do you do?
That’s all I said.
Stay in Upasana because
anyway your role is so minor in this existence
that tomorrow morning if you evaporate - no problem.
Only if you leave your mess here and go, problem,
but if you simply evaporate there’s no problem for anybody,
isn't it?
Yes or no?
So your role in your own life is so minor,
so very minor;
everything is being done to you,
just everything.
So, how can you be the hero?
When you have a two-bit role
if you think you are a hero you’re making a serious mistake, isn't it?
That’s all I’m talking about.
I am not talking about doing any great spiritual sadhana,
but if you are
if you live in truth that is a sadhana, what else?
To stop the lies that you’re creating,
that is all the sadhana.
Searching for truth, knowing truth does not mean
you have to go in search of it somewhere.
It’s not hiding behind the mountain;
it’s on this side, you know.
Right now this part of the planet is dark,
so will you go looking on the other side?
No, it’s here.
Truth means just this;
whatever there is, is truth.
Whatever you have made up is a lie.
That’s all there is, isn't it?
And you being a hero in this existence, is your rubbish.
It’s got nothing to do with reality.
So if you understand that
you understand you have a very minor role in the existence;
not just in the making of the existence, in your own life.
Even if something as simple as breath or heartbeat
is left in your hand you will be a complete mess within a minute.
Yes or no?
So I’m not saying anything new.
Not a teaching,
just reminding you the reality of what your life is
and that’s all living in truth means
that you’ve not made up anything.
You’re not writing your own story; you’re
you are trying to live life.
If you live life you can only live it the way it is.
Only if you make up a story you can make your own story, isn't it?
If you are doing fiction you can make it up the way you want.
If you’re living life, you can live life only the way it is;
there is no other way to live.
So do not think it’s some kind of a teaching.
That’s how life is.
Just live it;
don’t make up any story.
If you make up a story which is not true
and believe it is true,
when your script comes to an end
then you’ll be at a loss because there is nothing.
If you go with reality,
it is on whether you are alive or dead; it’s on.
You being with it is the safest way to be, best way to be.
That’s the only way you can experience life.
Otherwise you will experience the treachery of your own words,
nothing else.
Questioner: Namaste Sadhguru.
My name is Dipesh,
I’m coming from Kerala.
I have been reading books
almost h… hundred books about spirituality.
I… I like talking spirituality,
I like philosophizing about spirituality,
about Buddhism,
anapanasati yoga –everything,
but when coming to practice I postpone it.
How to avoid laziness? (Laughter)
Sadhguru: So you cannot think about it,
you cannot talk about it because
whatever you think and talk about is not spirituality.
It's not even good literature.
Really, believe me,
there’s better literature in the world than spiritual books.
If hundred books that you read did not create enough thirst in you to do something about it,
there is nothing spiritual about these books.
If it created a longing within you that you couldn’t help doing something about it,
then that book is okay
even that book is not spiritual
at least it's inspirational.
It inspired you enough to take a step.
And a million words that you read are of no consequence.
If you take one little step it's worth all the scriptures on the planet.
So before it's too late,
take at least one small step.
Now that you’re here at least start one twelve minute Isha Kriya.
And I’ve specially designed this for people like you
it's got words in the meditation (Laughter/Applause)
because (Laughs) those who live on words
those who feed upon words,
without words they cannot live, you know.
There’re enough beautiful things in this planet and in this existence,
if you paid enough attention, you would become wordless.
But a whole lot of people thrive on words
because they have never paid enough attention to anything.
So if you pay enough attention you will become wordless.
For days on end as a growing boy I never said a word
because what’s there to say?
You can't drink in the world around you, it's too much.
These two eyes and these five senses are not enough to grasp.
It hardly gives you any sense.
So when you don’t pay attention to life
you will get hugely enamored by words.
And I’m sure
You said Buddhism and all (Laughs),
so you’re repeating what Gautama said
or whatever they printed in his name.
Yes (Laughs),
because if I speak something today,
by tomorrow morning it becomes hundred different versions.
If Gautama spoke - poor man,
twenty-five hundred years ago,
what all they should have said in his name.
They’ve said too many words which are not his words.
And that is why it becomes an ‘ism’ (Laughs).
It has become an ‘ism’ means
that means there’s nothing to do with the Buddha.
Buddhism means all the people around created a whole lot of things.
Buddha is a different thing.
Buddhism is another thing.
So with everything else.
So don’t feed on those ‘isms,’
just start one simple process with words,
best for you. (Laughs)
Please do it.
It's not good to get into spiritual academics
Spiritual process should never become an academic subject unfortunately it has become for a lot of people
So
I Want you to relate this question to yourself
Do not use these things because it becomes an academic subject now. There is a you're assuming
There is a karmic body you are assuming you have a mind
now I'm saying you don't really know, isn't it?
Okay, if you have a mind you must be able to locate it. Isn't it? can you locate it?
Can you locate where your mind is?
Then you don't know whether it is there or not. See suppose you walk into this hall this guy says. I'm in this hall
You look everywhere you go behind this pillar post here there under this bench everything
You don't find the guy.
Do you have a doubt or not whether these guy is in this room are not?
Yes, or no?
This is the, way isn't it?
So you look wherever you want. There is no mind
Now this is not just playing with words you
Need to understand
you
When if you want to explore this this must come from your context.
from the context of your experience of life only then
It will come out well for you
right now you ask them academic question
Anywhere, you go the same thing. What is the nature of the atman? What is the relationship between atman and Paramatman?
You not seen atman you not seen paramatman. Why are you interested in the relationship?
Atman Paramatman means, for those of you who do not know your common terminology in India this means the soul and God
What's the relationship? you not seen both.
How do you know they have a relationship?
Maybe they divorced
If you look at the quality of life people are living probably they divorced isn't it
So don't go into academics of spirituality spirituality is not an academic process
It has to be an experience you're longing to know
So what you're trying to ask is what is the impact of my past on my present working of my mind?
You tell me can your mind function without memory?
I wipe out all your memory would you have a thought?
You have to build new memory otherwise there'll be no taught isn't it?
So that's a relationship
without one the other cannot exist
It's only because of the Karmic memory the mind is functioning
If there's no memory. How would it function? It won't function for a moment.
so if you have some
esoteric idea of Karma drop that
Karma means
Just the residual impact of all the actions you have performed in your body, in your mind, in your emotions, in your energies
the residual imprint of that, so that is the Karma
So without that memory your mind couldn't even function. There is no such thing
It is from that this is all coming
Another way of looking at it is there is no such thing as mind. This is just karma
There is a discriminatory buddhi which is not mind
there is a discriminatory intellect
and There is Karma. There is really no mind
There is a huge mass of memory with a certain discretion. You can pick what you want
But if you don't have the discretion they just run right within yourself all the time
This is all that's happening this is all that happening with people
Because the discriminatory mind or the intellect has not been
sufficiently developed or applied to
The past memory is running right.
All the time it's going on what happened 10 years ago its still bothering people because its just going on
So whatever ideas you may have whatever
Intentions you may have whatever ambitions you may have
The Karma Will Overrun it
because the necessary
Discrimination and awareness is not brought in for this discretion. You need a certain level of awareness
only if that is there
Karma can be consciously used
Memory is not a bad thing
whatever the memory is
whatever the
the content of the Memory
No memory is a bad thing you remember something horrible you remember something beautiful you remember all kinds of things
This is not a problem the problem is you do not have the necessary
Discretion to pick what you want when you want isn't it?
That's all it is isn't it?
So all the horrible things that have happened on the planet
Usually only what horrible things that are happening the news cameras go on take all this
it's on the film , it's stored somewhere in a computer . is it biting you?
no
If it if it is played here also, it need not bite you only if you react it bites you isn't it?
The same thing here. It's all just stored and kept if you react it will bite you
If you consciously use it you can use it in so many different ways. It doesn't matter. What is the recording?
What your karma is?
Is not the problem
are you able to do you have the necessary awareness and
Discretion to Employ this in the right sense or not. That's all it is
you
[Sadhguru] Every, every form has a hidden sound within itself.
When I say a hidden sound...
The surface sound of an object will come out
when you strike it. If you strike a gong, the sound that you hear,
the sound that many of you hate because it rings at 04:45 in the morning,
that is the surface sound of that object. There will be a hidden sound to the object.
If one knows the hidden sound of an object or a form, rather,
once you know the hidden sound of a certain form you find you also know the form,
you find a certain access and a certain intimacy to that form. It is based on this that
in this culture we named children like this.
Feeling the fundamental reverb of a child, accordingly a name was given,
so that by uttering the name, above all the child constantly hearing the name,
will not become a closed life, will become an open possibility because constantly
every time his name is uttered something touches him very deep down inside,
not just a way of calling a person but a way of opening a person just by uttering the name
The naming of a child, today has become the whim of the parents according to
the fashion of the times; but till recently the naming of a child was not in the hands
of the parents, always it was somebody else who knows little better who decided
what the child should be called; because you're naming a person for social and
practical reasons but that's not all because existence is just a complex amalgamation
of reverberations. In this complex process of various types of vibrations,
you also are one. If you just become just one more, you are like a grain of sand - nothing.
In the vastness of this cosmic space, this little body is nothing.
But if this hidden sound finds expression then this is like a key to everything.
This not only opens me but it also opens the other, whatever I touch
with this sound because this is my sacred key.
So every child when he's born the parents were given the freedom to give them
some pet name for their emotional satisfaction but his real name was given
by somebody else who was supposed to know better than the parents,
not always but... that's due to lack of education,
that's due to discontinuance of culture, that is due to inefficient transmission
from generation to generation; otherwise this is done by someone
who knows what is the fundamental reverberation of this little child.
So they wait for a certain period of time, they observe the child,
they make other astrological calculations and arrive that this is the hidden sound
of this child and that is what we should bring out because it is only in blossoming that,
it is only in allowing that to flower and find expression
this child will find full expression to his life; otherwise a seed that never sprouted,
on the surface many things happened, that's not it.
And this is how even the deities are named. The other day someone told me
you know, I sent word for them and they were not available anywhere.
I said, 'Where were you?' This person said, 'Sadhguru, I was at DLT.' I said,
'What, DLT? Where were you?' 'No, I was at Dhyanalinga Temple.'
'Oh, DLT. 'So you go to DLT, it's one thing.
'I was in Dhyanalinga,' that's a different thing.
The deities are named like this. If you utter the sound Bhairavi,
tears should come to you. If you say Dhyanalinga, stillness should come to you.
If you say Sadhguru, a wave of ecstasy should pass through you.
If you utter the sound with the necessary involvement, because
sounds are not just nonsensical garbage, sound is reverberation;
if the reverberation is right, it gives you the needed access.
So when the music is on, I want you to listen to the sound,
not to the music. Do you understand what I'm saying? I want you to listen to
the sound-sound of it, not the music of it. If you want to have the pleasure of music
you can listen to music. If you want to find deeper access to life,
you must listen to the reverberations, not to the lilt. Lilt is surface.
Lilt is a small thing -- beautiful but that's it.
The reverberations are the very making of life.
How this one reverberates right now, it's
it'll determine everything about this one. If this reverberates right,
it will not only determine the nature of this one's life,
it will determine the nature of everything's life. It will not only determine
the nature of the individual, it will also determine how everything else happens
around that being. So when the music is on in the Darshan
I want you to behold the sound, not the music.
Sadhguru: If you’re not paying attention to what I’m saying,
would you know what I’m talking?
No.
That’s so with every aspect of life, isn’t it?
If you’re not paying attention to it,
you don’t know what you’re eating,
you don’t know what you’re breathing,
you don’t know what’s happening.
Most people will not notice the fragrance of the flowers
or anything;
they’re just walking through like rocks
or … let me say a bull
because they want to… you know
a bull is worshipped in the stock market
So
it’s a evolutionary fallback.
If you walk like a bull or a bear, you
it’s an evolutionary fallback.
You’ve evolved to be a human being, taking millions of years,
now you don’t want to fall back.
To be human means
what is unique about a human being is –
we do the same things, what the other animals do -
it is just that all that the animal can do,
we do the same things but we can do it consciously.
That’s a big difference.
And doing anything consciously will not come
if you don’t have sufficient attention
towards things that you do or things that you do not do.
Especially things that you do not do –
you must have absolute attention towards those,
otherwise they’ll creep into you.
So this Attention Deficiency Syndrome has happened
because people’s idea of education is information.
Right now the whole idea of human education system
has become
heaping you with information.
The more information you heap upon on any mind
or let’s say starting from childhood,
the more he will develop aversion to attention
because without knowing anything,
information gives you a false feeling
that you know everything.
This has become a fashion now.
Today if you’re invited for a dinner party,
You Google out information about the hundred billion galaxies;
they’ve all been numbered and named and all that, okay?
That… That 556BZ, that galaxy, you know?
About that you know some information.
You Google out, get these two sentences out
and go to the dinner party.
Whoever talks to you, they say, “How are you?”
“Hey do you know about this galaxy which is a
a trillion mi… light years away
which is BB…” whatever
and you talk about it. Everybody thinks you’re smart.
This is the whole problem with the world right now.
We’re considering information
We are mistaking information for intelligence.
An enterpreneur or anybody who wants to navigate
through any situtation needs intelligene
not just information
information will be useful on the side
but it is intelligence which will allow you to navigate
through a particular situation in a unique way
not the way somebody else is doing.
we are mistaking information for intelligence
Once you heap yourself with too much information,
now attention is a serious problem.
Once you have no attention,
once you have no ability to hold your attention,
you have lost your ability to access your intelligence also.
You just churn out the information from memory.
There’s a beautiful incident.
You’ve heard of Andrew Carnegie?
When Andrew Carnegie started his enterprise,
in a short span of time,
he became so super successful and made so much money.
At that time
Okay, this is not the age of Google or Facebook or Twitter
where in two years they become multi-billionaires and all.
Those… Those days people had to set up manufacturing,
this and that, and make money
which would take decades or generations.
So this guy made so much money in a short span of time.
People suspected… the US government suspected
he’s doing some malpractice.
So they set up a… a senate investigation committee,
so they questioned him in every way possible,
and they found nothing wrong with his business.
Then they asked, “How do you manage to make so much money
and be so successful?”
So Andrew Carnegie said something very simple,
“See, I can keep my mind focused on something
for five minutes at a stretch –
five minutes.
Can any of you do it?”
All the senators, they thought
“What’s the problem with five minutes?”
And he set up an experiment.
They tried to keep their attention;
they couldn’t keep it for… for a few seconds –
one moment here, one moment there.
This is the fate of most human beings.
So then he said,
“You should not be running United States”
So, human ability
There’s something called as chitta.
There’s a different
See, in English language mind is mind.
Largely you’re considering the memory part of your mind as mind.
In the yogic system, there are four main aspects of the mind.
I’ll not go into the detail,
but the memory part of the mind is of least importance.
It’s the chitta
which is connected with the consciousness
which is most important.
If you find a shape for your chitta,
that shape will manifest always
because it’s empowered by life-making material,
which you
which for lack of words we’re using the word consciousness,
that which is the basis of life.
Once your mind is yoked to that,
then what shape your mind takes
Mind is like a cloud,
you can make it any shape –
you can make it god-like,
you can make it… a devil out of it,
you can make a pig out of it,
you can make whatever out of it, you know.
It’s a nebulous thing.
So what shape you give to your chitta,
it will always manifest in the world because
it’s… it’s empowered by life-making energy behind it.
So that is the most important aspect of the mind,
not the memory.
Memory is important to handle the material aspects.
After all, an entrepreneur may be just trying to handle material.
It’s fine
but I would like an entrepreneur’s life to become an exciting adventure
where he… his process of exploring new possibilities
become truly new possibilities in his experience,
not just economic possibilities.
And that possibility is there in an entrepreneur’s life –
that he can turn his entrepreneurship into a spiritual possibility
and a spiritual growth
or growth of the being itself,
which I feel everybody should explore.
That’s why we’re trying to bring a spiritual element.
Success will come easy, more than anything
because… Success will come easy not because of any magic,
simply because you function at your full potential.
If you want to
You know there is a
in schools, they have something called as a three-legged race.
Though you get three legs, you run slower;
with two legs you would run faster, isn’t it?
With three legs you must become more efficient in numbers
if you just simply look at it,
but this is how it is.
With … more information
More information means something that is not yours,
you attach it to your memory
and identify yourself with it.
The more you do that, the less effective you become.
But right now our whole idea of education is information
and there is internet.
A twelve-year-old child knows
what is the name of the galaxy up there
a trillion light years away,
which is not good for him
because this is not knowledge,
this is not of any usefulness.
This is only for boastfulness
and above all,
it’ll take away your ability to pay attention
because the basis of attention is
you realize that you do not know even a speck in the universe properly.
In its entirety,
you do not even know an atom
that’s why you can pay attention.
If you think “I know this,”
you cannot pay attention.
It’s the arrogance of information
which will bring you attention deficiency.

Sadhguru: Our hearts go out to the Kashmiri people.
This disaster caused by the flooding of river Jhelum
has created an unprecedented situation.
The suffering of the people of Kashmir has deeply touched all our hearts,
the quick response from the central government
and above all the stupendous effort that the Indian Army has put in
in saving hundred thousands of lives
rehabilitating them in many different ways.
It is truly heartwarming to see that the Indian Army is doing such a fantastic job.
They have been at every disaster, wherever it happens in this country.
Our good wishes to them so that they will continue to succeed in saving lives in Kashmir.
Above all India as a nation is responding wonderfully
as it should to the plight of Kashmiri people.
Sadhguru: A beard does not grow on just Gurus, it grows on all men, really.
really
Believe me, it is so (Laughs).
But they are all doing all kinds of funny things with it
you must ask them why are they doing it.
No body part has come without a purpose, isn’t it?
For everything, including the spleen, there is a purpose.
So nature did not give you anything without a purpose.
If… if you ask them why are they removing it,
they don’t know,
because
When the English came to India,
every Indian man had a beard or at least a moustache.
Today you go out on the Mumbai Street,
everybody’s a muchmunda.
Because they are trying to imitate the people who came and ruled them
because those who rule you are a symbol of power.
Now, if you are in a certain level of sensitivity
then you would know what is the effect and the aspect of,
you know, everything in your body.
You think this is fashion
but you must understand the only reason
why you are cutting your hair into various shapes and forms is
because there is no pain in it.
So if there was no pain in your nose
in the name of fashion you would have cut it into many shapes by now.
Even though there is pain, people are poking it in ten different places today (Laughs).
Suppose there was no pain in your whole body,
you would have taken your intestines out and go like this (Gestures) on the streets,
yes.
Yes or no?
Right now,
most human beings are not conscious enough,
their intelligence is not conscious enough
even to preserve themselves if there was no pain.
It’s only pain which is keeping them in one piece;
otherwise they would cut themselves into two pieces
and carry one hand here and one hand there.
They would do all kinds of crazy things.
Only pain is saving them, not their intelligence.
If your intelligence begins to function,
if your sensitivity begins to function
then your concern will be about
how you are within yourself
and what you experience
and how you can perceive more.
Your concern will be not about how you look.
So the advantage about the looks is
For ten years if I don’t have a mirror, I still look the same (Laughter).
People who are removing all this,
one day without a mirror they’ll look different, isn’t it?
And whatever your fashion of the day
Have you seen pictures of people fifty years ago,
hundred years ago?
Somebody cut their moustache like this (Gestures),
somebody did this,
today you look at it, it looks funny, okay?
They look like caricatures.
And today’s fashions also will look like that after a period of time.
But a full bearded man looks the same always
thousand years later he still looks the same,
because that’s the way nature intended.
Nature did not intend anything without a purpose.
If you believe in geometry and design,
so the design is like this.
I don’t want to change the design of the Creator,
I want to use it to the fullest benefit.
Sadhguru: One unfortunate subject,
which should not have existed
but right now it’s become a national debate,
which is rape.
Because of a certain horrible incident that happened in New Delhi,
the whole country is talking… about rape.
So,
this needs to be understood
that though there may be a sexual stimulus to rape,
it is not about sexuality alone;
it’s about the power to possess.
This wanting to possess comes from various things.
One fundamental mistake that societies have done is
somewhere in the minds of the youth
the male youth in the world,
we have put the idea
that a female is a
an object
a thing that you can possess.
Either somebody’s father can give you away;
if he refuses, you can take it.
It’s still there, isn’t it in the background?
Somewhere very deep in the psychological structure
there is an idea that
a woman is a commodity.
A commodity is
if something doesn’t have a mind of its own,
that’s a commodity.
So
this probably in some places,
consciously implanted;
in many other places, unconsciously implanted,
but it’s deeply implanted in people’s minds.
Without taking this away -
just one more law
hang the rapist,
castrate the rapist
is not going to really produce results.
And where does this come from?
They did a very wonderful thing in the ancient
Bharat or India
the Hindu law proclaimed
a man cannot go to heaven without his wife.
You must understand the significance of this.
I want you to understand the significance of it
a few thousand years ago
In many ways today,
the playing field has been leveled for man and woman
not because of any great social evolution
but because of technology -
the technological development which has made a woman
being capable of participating in many global activities.
If there was no technology,
if it was a question of your physical strength which carried you from place to place,
then definitely a woman would be still very homebound -
not that she shouldn’t be home -
I’m saying being home is one thing,
being home-bound is one thing.
Being home is nice; being bound by home is a different thing.
So
yes definitely when somebody perpetrates a violent act,
they need to be punished
but still if you want a better society
not just better laws
a law
or a punishment is only relevant after things have gone wrong
hanging somebody,
doing something else is still not going to fix somebody’s life.
If we want to see that things don’t go wrong,
there may be no absolute fix,
but definitely there is something called as
‘Lowering the percentages’
or
‘Heightening the percentages’.
When you’re dealing with the larger world,
it is only question of ‘Lowering the percentages’.
Maybe there is never going to be an ideal society
where no such thing will happen,
but in striving towards that possibility -
the most important thing is
we need to understand
right now the chant that we were doing is just about that.
Still in most minds,
a woman means body parts,
an accumulation of body parts.
Yes?
A breast, a navel, a curve, long hair, something.
That’s why many of you have short hair these days. (Few Laugh)
One part of it you’ve gotten rid of.
It is still a sum of body parts.
Why is a woman a sum of body parts in someone who is not a woman
is essentially this is springing
this is not just with the man,
with the woman also,
but she doesn’t conclude;
she does not make the same conclusions
that a man makes
but she is also bound by the same limitations.
The moment the boundaries of your physicality becomes ultimate boundaries of life
you do not experience your breath,
you do not experience any transaction that’s happening to keep you alive.
This (Gestures) you think is ultimate boundary.
If this is ultimate boundary -
if I look at this, those who look like just like me,
they are enemies we would like to get rid of.
Those who look different, those who seem to have different kinds of body parts
are something that you want to possess.
So essentially,
the problem is rooted in investing too much in physicality of life.
If societies or human beings were experiencing their lives
little more than their physical boundaries,
these things would simply go down just like that.
Maybe not eliminated but would go down dramatically and considerably
to a point where a few offenders you can deal with them with punishment.
You cannot deal a vast majority of population with punishment.
Suppose ten, fifteen, twenty percent of the people are committing crime in a society -
you cannot punish twenty percent of the population.
If it’s one percent, you can punish them -
you can deal with punishment.
If it’s twenty percent you cannot deal with punishment.
It’s not going to help.
You want to hang twenty percent of the population? (Laughs)
That’s going to be worse than rape and that’s not going to help.
So punishment,
people think is a deterrent.
To some extent it is maybe;
for most people, it is not
they will just try to do it more carefully.
Yes?
They will try to take more precautions about it.
Maybe, because they have to take more precautions
it may come down a little bit,
but still what’s happening in one’s mind and how it translates into life is the next step.
But it’s happening in your mind means
when there’s an opportunity, it will happen in reality.
Right now,
it seems there are over five hundred rape video games,
very popular.
The video games go like this
this very popular video game goes like this
a mother with two daughters is in a railway station
and the video game is about how to rape the mother.
If you successfully do it,
you’ll get one of the daughters.
This is a video game commercially being sold;
bought in millions;
secretly people playing these games in their homes or offices or wherever on their computers.
We are nurturing a sick world
and we expect it to not to happen in the railway station.
It will happen.
This time, it’s happened in a bus
and this time, it happened in the capital city
so it’s big news.
Whole country and the media is on, fine.
Attention was needed for this,
but if it happened in somewhere
some local place, in some village,
in some little town
it would be just one more statistic
or it does not even become a statistic
because nobody reports such things.
(Sadhguru): It once happened,
Shankaran Pillai went to New York City,
got into a taxi
and the taxi driver was driving to a certain destination.
Being an Indian who has just landed in America
he wants to talk to everybody;
after all we are Indians.
So taxi driver
he started talking, talking, talking
and then taxi driver also opened up.
And then, when the destination came nearby,
he wanted him to stop.
So he put his hand in that small opening
and touched him on the shoulder,
‘I want to stop here.’
The taxi driver jumped out of his skin
and lost control over the car
and went and hit a tree
and went up the tree and stopped like this. (Gestures)
And Shankaran Pillai had a bleeding nose
and he said,
‘What?
What did I do?
Why did you just jump like this?
I just wanted you to stop.’
He said,
‘You don’t understand,
last thirty two years I’ve been driving a hearse; (Few laugh)
never ever my customers ever (Laughter)
did this.’ (Laughs)
that is you know he’s been working for an undertaker.
So his customers are always dead
and today when the customer touches him on the shoulder,
phoo
he lost it.
And most human beings are living like this,
they are jumpy about everything;
they are jumpy about everything
because they are living with the dead.
If you live with yesterday,
you are living with the dead.
Please understand,
look at this carefully.
Everything that you are,
your personality is crafted
from that which is dead.
Your eyes are colored with that which is dead;
from what happened yesterday you look at everybody.
So you are living with the dead
and in case something alive happens you will be jumpy,
you’ll jump out of your skin. (Laughs)
You will see (Laughs)
when we initiate people something comes alive little bit,
people are jumpy what's happening.
You are coming alive (Laughs),
you’ve been dead for a long time.
This is called raising the dead. (Laughter)
[Questioner] We talk of destiny; we talk of so many things being predetermined in our lives.
Then where’s the question of applying our intelligence to situations if things,
if there is already if everything is predetermined?
[Sadhguru] Who talked about destiny? Did I?
[Questioner] You didn’t talk but generally everyone
even when something happens your destined to be like this.
It’s destiny, it’s the work of destiny or whatever. There’s a general perception about
[Sadhguru] That’s a simple escape from all the nonsense you have done to your life.
For all the nonsense that you have done to your life destiny is a simple escape.
Oh, it’s my destiny that’s why I’m like this.
Now whatever you call as your destiny is also self created.
You’re creating it unconsciously. You can also create it consciously.
There are certain parameters in your life. I think we looked at this the other day when somebody asked karma.
You have unconsciously written a certain software for yourself. So you are tending to go in that direction.
Whatever you try to do, it just keeps going in this direction.
You want to go here, but it just keeps taking you this way because your software is like that.
It develops certain tendencies and starts moving in certain direction.
This does not mean you cannot redirect yourself. Yes, it’s quite compulsive.
It needs an effort beyond body and mind to completely change that and put it in a different direction.
What we’re doing here, the whole science of what we’re doing here is just that.
If you make your energies a little more malleable. If you gain a little more mastery over
your life energies and a little more mastery over your mind and body
you will see you can become one hundred percent master of your destiny.
I’m talking about a science where you can choose the very womb that you’re born into.
Even now you’re choosing but you’re choosing unconsciously. You can also choose consciously.
Whether to be born or not to be born also can be chosen.
It is just that how much have you taken into the perspective of your life.
If you have mastery over your body about fifteen to twenty percent of your destiny will be in your hands.
If you have mastery over your mind about fifty to sixty percent of your life and your destiny will be in your hands.
If you have mastery over your life energies one hundred percent of your destiny will be in your hands.
Sadhguru chants Sanskrit chant Jananam Sukhadam
Sadhguru: Good evening.
Good evening, everyone.
I said good evening.
Participants: Good evening.
Sadhguru: That’s better (Laughs).
Please.
Sanjiv Goenka: Good evening,
Namaskar,
welcome.
For me it's a very different experience.
We deal with the corporate world on a regular basis.
To deal with wisdom,
to deal with nobility,
to deal with sincerity
is completely different.
It's a rare honor,
a rare privilege.
Sadhguruji, suswagatham (Referring to Sanskrit word – welcome).
Sadhguru: Thank you (Laughs).
Sanjiv Goenka: I have never in the past researched
when I’ve gone into a talk or a conversation.
It really is the first time that I was compelled to do so (Laughter),
compelled by the stature,
the profundity,
and the intensity of Sadhguruji.
And then I did something that I haven’t done in a few years,
I actually made notes
just so that I don’t make any mistakes.
Sadhguru: You can't make a mistake asking questions (Laughter).
Sanjiv Goenka: Sadhguruji, I have been told
that every man,
every woman,
every child has come into this world with a mission,
and until that mission is complete,
he keeps taking rebirth.
I don’t know whether the concept of rebirth is true or not
but I do believe that everyone is here with a mission.
How does one find out
what that mission is
and what does it take to get there?
Sadhguru: Oh.
What I say may not be very pleasant (Laughs).
What is true may not always be pleasant.
What is pleasant need not be true,
but why truth is important is
because it works.
Pleasant things will bring solace to individual people.
Solace means
you’re seeking somebody’s help
to handle your psychological drama.
Truth means
you’re interested in the solution, not in solace.
So
this mission aspect
all the problems on the planet is simply because
everybody has their own mission
and these missions are
creating variety of conflict.
If all of us sit here
without any mission
Mission means an assumed position of importance and agenda –
individual agenda.
If all of us can sit here without any individual agenda,
if our hearts beat just as life,
not as a man,
not as a woman,
not as this party or that party
or this religion or that religion,
simply as life,
all of us will be very
will be able to see very clearly
what is it that is most essential right now in the world,
both for the individual and for the larger world.
Because every one of us have taken up this assumed
missionary positions,
in our fervor of our own missions (Laughs),
very brutal things are being done in the world.
People who even believe
I mean, mission is always god-given unfortunately.
You can look back on the history of humanity and see
whenever somebody said
“God spoke to me,”
terrible things happened around them.
In recent times
a President of a major nation said,
“God told me,”
since then over a million people are dead,
three countries are ruined
and it has bred something that you cannot contain
probably in the next hundred years
because god spoke to him.
So, there are too many assumptions in this.
There are too many assumptions involved.
First of all,
to think that I have a god-given mission,
there is an exaggerated sense of importance for the human being.
Somewhere,
there is a ridiculous idea that
human beings are central to the creation,
or the cosmos is human-centric.
No.
Tomorrow morning
if this entire solar system evaporates,
it will not even be noticed.
That is how vast it is –
creation.
All of us,
including the sun and the moon and all the planets,
if we just evaporate tomorrow,
it will not even be noticed –
it's such a small speck.
This tiny speck which we call as solar system,
in that,
planet Earth is a micro speck.
In that micro speck,
Kolkata is a super-micro speck.
In that,
you are a big man (Laughter/Applause).
And now everybody has their own god-given missions (Laughs).
Whatever,
the most horrendous things that are happening on the planet right now,
in Middle East,
all these horrendous things are happening
because they firmly believe
they’re doing god’s work.
Let's understand this –
sitting here we may think,
“Oh, these are all some cavemen or nut cases from somewhere.”
No,
no,
no.
They’re doing god’s work.
They truly believe it.
If they did not believe it,
they wouldn’t pitch their life for it, isn't it?
Any man who pitches his life
for whatever he thinks is right or whatever he believes,
you have to at least trust
he’s sincere about it (Laughs).
Is he sensible,
that’s another question
but is he sincere?
He is,
otherwise he wouldn’t pitch his life
because it is in the very intrinsic nature of life
whether you’re a man, woman, or an ant for that matter –
if you try to catch an ant,
he will do everything possible to save his life, isn’t it?
He does not think,
“It's just an ant’s life, let me shed it.”
No, no, no.
It's very valuable for him.
This is the intrinsic nature of life –
that, every life values itself for what it is.
Now, because most human beings have done nothing
about experiencing the intrinsic value of life
Right now, I would say most human beings are not life,
they’re a bundle of thoughts,
emotions,
ideas,
opinions
and prejudices.
Because they have become this,
now they’re coming up with another idea –
they have a god-given mission.
There is no mission.
Life is a phenomena beyond missions.
It is bigger than any silly mission we can think about.
It is more profound,
more organic
and more phenomenal
than anything human mind can ever think about.
Our missions
Local missions we can have.
Right now you can have a mission –
“I don’t want a single home in Kolkata without electricity” –
this’s your local mission, it's fine.
But this is not a god-given mission.
This is a sensible mission that you come to
because so many people are living in darkness,
that’s fine.
Everybody can come up with missions like this
out of your sense.
But the moment you have a god-given mission,
you’re a danger to the world (Laughter).
Yes (Laughs).
Sanjiv Goenka: Is there salvation?
And if so, what is it?
Sadhguru: Salvation from what?
Sanjiv Goenka: Salvation from birth and rebirth.
Sadhguru: So you believe
you are here many times over (Laughter).
See,
if you want to know something,
if you want to know anything,
genuinely if you want to know something
Hello, the people in the upper regions,
are you with us?
Participants: Yes
Sadhguru: Oh, good.
Participant: Can you increase the volume a bit?
Sadhguru: They want a little more volume.
Sanjiv Goenka: Increase it?
Participant: More volume.
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whoever, the control, sir, please, can you…?
Is this good?
Hello?
Participant: Yes, it's good.
Sadhguru: Okay.
See, if we are in pursuit of truth,
the most important thing is
we don’t assume anything.
You become a genuine seeker
only when you realize “I do not know”.
Those who do not realize
the immensity of “I do not know”
they will believe something.
The moment you believe something,
you get identified with it.
The moment you get identified with it,
your mind is a prejudiced mind,
it will only work around that.
Why is it so difficult
for human beings to say
“I don’t know”?
The fact of the matter is you don’t know.
Where the hell you came from,
where you’re going,
what is the nature of your existence –
you don’t know, isn't it?
Why can't we say “I don’t know”?
Is it okay?
Hello?
Participants: Yes
Sadhguru: Is it all right (Laughs) –
“What I know, I know;
what I do not know, I do not know.”
Is it okay?
Participants: Yes
Sadhguru: But right now the tendency in the world,
the training in the world is
whatever you do not know you believe (Laughs).
Belief needs support.
Belief needs social support.
You just believe something
that nobody here endorses,
you will start
going looking for forming your own society
which believes what you believe.
If you believe something and nobody else believes what you believe,
suddenly you look ridiculous, isn't it?
So you’ll always gather numbers around you.
The moment you gather numbers
Well,
numbers are useful in a democratic process
but numbers are not useful in seeking
because a crowd cannot seek.
Only individual intelligence can seek.
Only the longing within an individual human being is capable of seeking.
A crowd cannot seek anything.
So in many ways when you get identified with a particular belief system,
you have become a crowd.
You are no more an individual.
If you ask anybody, they will say
Okay, for example, reincarnation.
They’ll say reincarnation –
if I say this is all rubbish,
they will say, “But Gita says this.”
So, you have an authority which said it.
Because Krishna said it, it must be true.
In future,
somebody will say “Sadhguru said it.”
It doesn’t matter who said it.
The question is –
do you want authority to be the truth
or do you want the truth to be the authority?
If you want the truth to be the authority in your life –
because that’s the only thing that works –
then we must come to this much –
we must realize the immensity of “I do not know”.
“I do not know”
is the basis of all knowing.
When you truly, truly realize “I do not know”,
wanting to know,
longing to know,
seeking to know,
and the possibility of knowing becomes a living reality.
Otherwise, you believe one thing,
I believe one thing,
I’ll form one party,
you will form another party.
We will pretend we are brothers,
when it come we’ll hag… hack each other (Laughter).
Yes. (Laughs)
I don’t have to say this.
You’re seeing enough examples right through history, right?
We will
We will say,
“We are all brothers,
we are wonderful like this.
We respect your belief, I respect my belief”
but when it really comes to the crunch,
we will hack each other.
Not once,
thousands of times we’ve been doing the same thing,
won't we ever learn?
So, what you’re asking is not about reincarnation,
or in a way
you’re asking what happens beyond death.
Tch, some things you know best only by experience (Laughter).
Now,
essentially what you’re asking is –
“What is the nature of my existence?”
It gets clothed in so many things.
Just now,
some time ago I was in conversation with Harsh.
He burst car tires,
he
what?
He took me to Middle East.
He made me cross Pakistan border, many things.
But fundamentally what you’re asking is –
“What is the nature of my existence?”
If you want to know the nature of your existence,
you just have to pay attention to this one (Referring to oneself) right now.
Tch, you said a word which I keep on demolishing wherever I go.
You said “corporate world”.
There is no corporate world –
there is just one world (Laughter/Applause).
So, the moment you belong to one world,
I belong to another world,
intergalactic fight will happen (Laughter).
So, we are just in this world.
If you pay attention, how you have happened
Right now, when you and me sit here,
well,
I have my physical presence,
you have your physical presence,
and everybody else has their physical boundaries –
this is my boundary,
that is your boundary,
that is somebody else’s boundary.
This physical body which is defining your boundary right now,
how did it happen?
In Bengal,
maybe it's just fish and rice (Few Laugh).
What else do you eat, hmm?
What else?
Sadhguru: That’s not your diet (Laughter).
Participant: Rasagulla.
Sadhguru: Yeah, maybe.
So fish, rice, and rasagulla in the head (Laughter).
No, I’m saying you’re sweet.
So, fundamentally,
we accumulated this body by ingesting food.
What we call as food is just actually a piece of the planet.
It's good to get it now.
If you experience this now,
if this becomes a living reality –
you understand this is just a piece of the planet,
little bit of topsoil I picked up
and I’m walking around.
Well, you can carry your topsoil in style
or in a clumsy manner –
it's up to you,
but it is just topsoil.
If you don’t get it now,
one day you will anyway get it from the maggots.
Yes (Laughs)?
One day when they bury you or burn you,
anyway you will get it, isn't it?
So what you accumulate,
whatever you accumulate can be yours at the most for now,
but cannot be you, isn't it?
Anything that you accumulate you can claim,
“Is mine”.
But if you say, “It is me”,
it amounts to
Even by medical definition
you are psychologically off (Laughter).
Yes, that’s what it means.
Suppose I say,
“I’m this furniture,”
people know I have lost it.
This is happening every day.
Food appears in your plate,
you say, “This is my food.”
You eat it and immediately say,
“This is me.”
So if you want to know the nature of your existence,
one simple thing you can do is,
tonight before you fall asleep
If this is a genuine question
Is it a question or is it entertainment?
Is it a genuine question?
It will become a genuine question
when your bones start creaking
and you know mortality starts knocking on your doors.
Oh! Am I saying something wrong?
Do you know all of you are mortal?
I am saying, do you know
even if you’re in the upper regions you will die one day,
that’s all I’m asking (Laughter).
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Is it okay?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: This is not my wish.
I’ll bless you with a long life.
But with or without me,
you’ll anyway die.
Lot of people believe other people die (Laughter/Applause).
No,
you and me will die (Laughs).
You and me will die.
Not today,
we don’t want it today
but when it's time we will die.
So everything that you have accumulated
will become meaningless on that day.
Right now if you learn,
tonight before you go to bed,
if you can sit on your bed,
everything that you are not,
everything that you have accumulated,
for two minutes you keep it aside
and just go to bed
go to sleep.
If you sleep with this much awareness every day,
one day you may wake up enlightened.
Yes (Applause) (Laughs).
You will know the nature of your existence.
Because right now if I tell you,
“Sanjiv,
the nature of your existence,
your atma
You know how atma came?
It is a drop of paramatma” (Laughs),
I can tell you many things,
but till it becomes a living experience for you,
it is just a story, isn't it?
Stories will add color to our life
but will not bring truth and liberation to our life.
You’re talking about salvation.
If the longing for salvation is genuine,
then stories are only entertainment.
It doesn’t matter whether the story came from ancient scripture
or story came from a contemporary guru,
it is just entertainment.
But there are methods.
I’m (Laughs)
I’m not known to be an entertainer.
I do brutal things in a pleasant manner (Laughter),
very brutal things but in a pleasant manner.
People like it ultimately because it works (Laughs).
Ultimately all that matters in this life is
what works and what doesn’t work, isn't it?
Yes?
Whether it's in business,
in your world and my world (Laughter),
in every damn world,
what works is ultimately matters, isn't it?
What doesn’t work, however pretty it is,
doesn’t jell after sometime.
So if we are seeking salvation,
if
Don’t seek salvation.
Just,
instead of waiting for that day
when you will sit on your death bed and wonder
what is this all about,
tonight you sit on your bed and wonder
what is this all about.
Let
You come down to reality.
Right now you’re running away with your psychological drama to such an extent,
the existential is completely missing.
If you pay attention,
you will see
and you will constantly be aware of your mortal nature.
That means you know you shall also die.
This is not a negative thought.
This means your time will get organized in a most sensible manner.
When you know you’re on a limited leash of time,
your time will get organized in a most sensible manner.
If you’re conscious that you will also die
and it could be any day
Okay, we are planning for this many years,
but nobody here has come with a guarantee card.
Have you?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: So it could be today.
If you’re conscious of this,
do you have time to do anything that doesn’t truly matter to you?
You will do only what really matters to you.
When every human being is doing only what truly, truly matters to them,
this is a beautiful world.
Right now they’re doing too much rubbish (Sanjiv laughs/Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: Being a very deep cricket enthusiast
and now somewhat involved with the sport,
I see with admiration,
the rise and rise and rise of Virat Kohli (Referring to an Indian international cricketer and current captain of Indian team).
I see his energy on the field,
I see his energy off the field,
I see the way he’s transforming and rewriting the rules of the game.
The T20 format
140 to 160 was par score,
he’s redefined it.
Now 190 is a par.
Sadhguru: 250
Sanjiv Goenka: 250, 240.
There is something within him that propels him more than others.
There are many people who are talented.
There are many people who have this ability,
but there are few who realize this ability.
What is it that takes one to realize
that he can do a little more,
he can inspire more,
he can create more,
he can create new standards?
Is there something from within
or is it something from outside?
What is it?
Sadhguru: I have also been watching Virat Kohli with interest
because
I have seen every great batsman in the last forty, forty-five years.
Very few have hit the ball the way he’s hitting it.
Probably the only other person that I can think of is Vivian Richards (Referring to a former West Indian cricketer),
who used to hit the ball like this,
but he did not have the sane
same sense of mission that this boy has (Laughs).
He just played for fun and you know, an island, Caribbean culture (Sanjiv laughs)
and he kind of didn’t take it so seriously,
or did not go at it with a certain zeal
with which this boy is going.
But I think he was the only one who was striking the ball
the way this boy is striking today, which is very rare.
Most people, who have watched only cricket on the television,
don’t understand this probably.
It's one of the most dangerous games on the planet.
A hard ball is coming at you over hundred-and-thirty, hundred-and-forty kilometers per hour
and this is the only sport where the ball is pitched
and it swings this way, that way,
which gives you a fraction of a second to make your decision
how to handle that ball.
It's… It's a very dangerous game.
You must… You know, there’re bowling machines.
They may be there in Kolkata.
Yes?
The bowling machines are there.
Young men, I’m telling you,
don’t try hundred-and-forty kilometers.
At eighty or ninety kilometers,
just… make
Set the bowling machine at ninety kilometers
and stand there and see how the ball comes at you.
It's crazy, okay?
So, every ball is different, the way it's coming at you.
So it needs to be handled.
Everybody who is there we must understand is very good (Laughs).
They may look clumsy, they may get out for zero
but they’re very good with what they’re doing.
But somebody stands out like this.
This reminds me of
There was a motorcycle rider who is known as
whose name was Kenny Roberts (Referring to Kenneth Leroy Roberts, an American former professional motorcycle racer)
who won the world championships five times in a row.
People couldn’t believe it because
you have to win sixteen races across the country to get to the championship.
All the machines are prepared by the top companies
and the talent is at the highest level,
but winning five in a row was considered unprecedented and impossible.
So they asked him,
“How do you do this?”
So he said,
“I go out of control with control” (Laughs).
I understand that very well (Laughs).
I live every step of my life like that –
always out of control, but with control (Laughs).
This is what everybody is seeking.
They want little madness in their life,
but they don’t want to go insane.
But their longing for safety and security
makes them insulate themselves from that little madness.
Then they wonder
“What's happened to my life?”
It's becoming boring and no good.
They try to step out,
then they get hit by something.
They again build walls around them.
This process is going on.
So when you take an example like this –
one thing is the zeal,
another thing is loving what you’re doing.
Really loving what you’re doing.
That’s what you want to do.
This once happened.
I was just walking into the Chennai airport
and the Indian hockey team was leaving for Germany for Champions Trophy that year.
A few years ago the Indian hockey team came and spent
a week or ten days in the Yoga Center
and we had helped the previous team
but this was a new team.
So when I walked in, KPS Gill (Referring to Kanwar Pal Singh Gill, former president of the Indian Hockey Federation (IHF)) was there
and he saw me and said,
“Sadhguru, you must come and speak to the boys.
We have a psychologist who is speaking to them right now” –
in the airport just before they leave for Germany.
Many of these boys have never (Laughs) gone out of the country.
For the first time, they’re going.
At that time, half the team was from the tribal belt
because they all came off the Tata Academy.
So they
I went there to see what they’re talking.
So this psychologist is trying to pep them up.
He is telling them
I can't repeat this in Hindi,
but he’s telling them,
“Your parents have brought you up,
you have to bring pride to them.
One billion people,
full Bharat is watching you,
you cannot disappoint them.”
These boys (Gestures) (Laughter)
These are all eighteen, nineteen-year-old boys from the tribal belt.
One billion people, their expectations
and their parents’ honor,
they’re just dazed like this (Gestures) (Laughs).
So they asked me to speak.
I said, “See…”
I asked them, “Do you guys know how to play hockey?”
I asked them to bring the sticks and the
I played hockey right through my school and college.
So I said,
“You guys,
do you know how to play hockey?”
They said, “Yes.”
I said, “No.
You guys don’t know how to play hockey.”
They said, “No.”
Suddenly they became,
“No, no, we know how to play hockey.”
“Then if you know how to play hockey,
this is all you do.
Those seventy minutes,
the ball must be continuously in the goal.
That’s your goal.
You want the ball to be constantly in the opposite goal.
Don’t try to beat Germany and Pakistan and somebody and somebody.
Just put the ball in the goal.
You like to do it, isn't it?”
“Yes, we like to do it.”
Said, “Just do that,
forget about Bharat and your parents and everybody (Laughter/Applause)
for some time.”
And last
One of these conversations I had in Hyderabad,
one of the film actors,
his final question is,
“Sadhguru, all this is okay.
But in cricket,
how to beat Pakistan” (Laughter)?
I said,
“You should not try to beat Pakistan.
You should just learn to hit the ball.”
There is no Pakistan in the ball, all right?
You just have to hit the ball.
You don’t have to beat Pakistan.
If you try to beat Pakistan with your stupid emotions,
you will do something stupid,
which has been happening continuously.
Now,
I think recently Virat Kohli came on the television and said,
“My only problem is I get angry.
I want to be like a monk,” something he said,
whatever his own version of being
wanting to calm.
I think he needs balance.
With the kind of talent he has,
if he learns to become balanced,
he is going to be a phenomena.
He’s going to be a
a new cricketing story on the planet,
not just one more player.
He has the necessary ingredients.
I said this when he was seventeen.
I saw him playing in Singapore
for the under eighteen team or something,
he was captaining that team at that time.
I saw this boy playing and then only I said,
“This guy will go far.”
And then he vanished out of my radar for almost five, six years
and then he surfaced suddenly one day in the test (Laughs)
in the Indian team
and now he’s going the way he’s going.
He needs to balance himself.
If he learns to be a cool fire,
not a fire that burns him up,
then he will do things which probably has not been done for a long time.
I think we can give him those tools of self-transformation
which will not take away the fire.
See, there are two ways to fire yourself.
If I get angry I can propel myself
this is one way.
But all of you know
whenever you’re angry it propels you,
at the same time,
it takes away your sense in many ways.
It takes away your capabilities.
We can show you scientifically
Medically, we can show you
how your system is getting poisoned when you are angry.
Instead of being that way,
with sheer pleasantness you can drive yourself.
You do not know how to
See, there is… there...
We have been driving internal combustion engines for a long time
which have been smoking and polluting and killing us
in many ways but they’ve been propelling us.
Now, we are coming to engines,
which has no internal combustion
which smoothly drives
without a noise,
without smoke,
without nothing
We’re just coming to that.
We’re just coming of age with automobiles.
Similarly, it's time humanity comes of age that
you learn to propel yourself
in a very pleasant manner.
I am also on twenty hours a day,
I’m just fooling around” (Laughs).
Why do you need anger and this and that,
if out of sense, you can drive yourself?
It is not necessary you have to drive yourself with anger or hatred.
Yes,
those things give you energy in a certain way,
but they take away your competence in many levels.
This boy needs tools for self-transformation.
I think we should deliver that to him (Laughter).
I would like to do that to him
because he is a phenomena in waiting.
Sanjiv Goenka: Yes. Yes.
If already not made
I mean he can be a much bigger phenomena
but he’s already a phenomena not in the making
Sadhguru: See, a one-season phenomena will be forgotten.
Sanjiv Goenka: Forgotten.
Sadhguru: He needs to become a
Yes (Laughs).
Sanjiv Goenka: In cricket you deal with lots of celebrities,
lots of kids who over a period of time become celebrities
and develop huge egos.
And when you see the game from within,
you see how large the egos are
and to the outside,
the ego doesn’t overtake the interests of the team
but sometimes it does.
How does one, as an owner,
draw a line between balancing the ego
and the interest of the team?
So, if you
if you were to pull up a celebrity,
he’s not used to it,
he sulks (Sadhguru Laughs),
then your team loses out.
If you don’t,
because of his ego,
sometimes wrong decisions are taken.
So, how does one balance this?
Sadhguru: This is not just in cricket,
this is everywhere (Laughs).
Sanjiv Goenka: Absolutely.
Sadhguru: You give somebody to do something.
If they do it for three days,
they have reached stratosphere (Laughs), you know?
If they do something, get little recognition,
if five people clap their hands,
they will rise.
So till they fall, they don’t realize
this is not the way to play cricket (Both laugh).
Up in the air you can't play cricket,
you got to be on the ground.
So, how to deal with it?
There are many ways
but the best way is not that we don’t deal with it.
When we… When I say we don’t deal with it,
they need tools for self-transformation.
What has happened with them is just this –
they are still driving themselves
because of the euphoria of the crowds,
what is written in the newspaper,
what other people are saying about you.
Or in other words,
you have not found anything about yourself –
you are a product of other people’s opinion.
Everybody is saying you’re great
and you start believing you’re great.
No.
You don’t have to believe anything.
If you’re good at something,
you just have to keep on seeing how to enhance that.
It is
This is the problem with people –
they think
they become ambitious.
Ambition means you’re tweaking your desire.
Instead of tweaking your competence,
you’re tweaking your desire,
which is just the wrong way to do life.
You don’t need to be ambitious,
you don’t need to think “I have to score hundred runs,”
you don’t need to think “I have to become a champion.”
You just have to hit the ball that’s coming at you right now.
That’s all you need to do.
For this,
you of course need training - that’s a different aspect.
Without that you wouldn’t have come here.
You just need the necessary alertness and presence of mind
to do what you have to do at that moment.
Instead of that, they’ve become stars.
Your reputation will not play.
It's only which
your competence which plays (Laughs).
Your reputation cannot play.
So, by the time they realize this,
many of them are flushed down
because there is a younger crop coming up doing things.
I think these boys,
you know, because without other exposure,
without… generally with education they’re just coming straight into the game
and they fully give themselves to the game.
Before they know what's happening,
they’re quite lost - many of them,
not all of them.
Many have matured with the game,
others have gotten lost with the game.
If they are given little education about how to handle themselves,
I think they’ll come out on the tops.
Sanjiv Goenka: Greed
I don’t know how to define greed
but I would,
in my own silly, stupid way I would define greed as
unlimited, irrational desire.
Sadhguru: No.
Generally greed is like this –
what I want is need,
what you want is greed (Laughter/Applause).
Generally, that’s how it is defined (Both laugh).
Greed is a strong word,
we don’t have to go to this.
Why
Greed is a consequence of a certain unfulfilled state.
When I say a consequence of a certain unfulfilled state –
what is a human being longing for, every human being?
All of you,
wherever you are right now,
you would like to be little more than what you are right now.
Isn't it so?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes.
If that little more happens, what?
Participants: Little more.
Sadhguru: Little more.
If that happens, what?
Participants: Little more.
Sadhguru: So, it looks like,
in installments, you’re going towards something.
How much more would settle you for good?
Let's look at it right now,
why go at it in installments?
How much more would settle you?
Hello?
If I make you the king or queen of this solar system –
don’t look at me with hope (Laughter),
I’ve not known to commit such blunders (Laughs).
Even if you become the king or queen of this solar system,
you will not be fulfilled,
you will look at the stars
because this is the nature of the human being.
There is something within you
always longing to expand in a boundless way.
Because you have gotten so very identified with your physical form,
you’re trying to find this boundless way
through physical means.
When we say physical,
let's understand this –
physicality can exist only because of a defined boundary.
If there is no boundary,
there is no physicality possible.
You can say something is physical
only if it has a defined boundary,
otherwise it cannot be physical.
So, through something which is
Physical is the world of boundaries.
Through the world of boundaries,
you’re trying to reach towards boundlessness.
This is like you’re driving your Ambassador car… I
Unfortunately, I don’t see too many on the Kolkata roads anymore.
You’re driving your Ambassador car
but you want to go to the moon.
You may go beyond the moon sometimes (Few Laugh),
if you try hard.
But you will not go to the moon
because to go to the moon you need a different kind of vehicle, altogether.
So you’re seeking boundlessness unconsciously.
So you’re trying to go towards boundlessness through physical means.
When it finds very basic physical expression,
you wanting to be more than yourself,
we call this sexuality.
All you’re trying to do is,
something that is not you,
you’re trying to make it a part of yourself for a few moments.
If it finds emotional expression,
we call this love –
something that is not you,
you want to include as a part of yourself.
If it finds a mental expression,
it gets labeled as greed,
ambition,
conquest,
or simply shopping (Laughter).
If it finds a conscious expression,
we call this yoga.
Yoga means union.
Yoga means you successfully erased
the boundaries of your individuality.
Because the boundaries of your individual nature are essentially your making.
When I say it's essentially your making –
right now, let us say you’re sitting here,
unfortunately,
somebody that you don’t like,
your enemy, happened to settle down in the chair next to you
or in front of you.
You can't stand them.
You’re sweating sitting there
because this horrible person is sitting next to you.
What Usha?
No, no, no (Laughs).
Your mind cannot take it,
but your body has no issue.
What they exhale you’re inhaling unconsciously but no problem (Few Laugh).
Yes (Laughs)?
Yes or no?
Your body has no problem,
this life has no problem.
Only your mind has problem
because your mind recognizes the boundary.
Your body doesn’t recognize the boundary.
You sit here and breathe –
what you exhale, the trees are inhaling,
what the trees exhale, you’re inhaling.
Really if you look at it,
one-half of your lungs is hanging out there (Few laugh).
Yes.
Your life is not happening separately.
It is happening as a one whole thing.
You’re just a pop-up from this planet. You know,
you have seen those pop-ups on your screen,
on your computer screen (Laughs)?
If they’ve paid only for two seconds ad,
it just pops up for two seconds and pup.
In the life of this planet,
you’re just a two-second pop-up
and you will pop out.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So,
this pop-up doesn’t understand it's just a pop-up,
it thinks it’s eternal.
Its boundaries are eternal.
You must get this now –
these boundaries are all made by you.
If you really fix the boundary
you can't breathe and you will die right now.
It is a transaction which is keeping you alive.
So this sense of boundary,
is wanting you to expand.
Because you know only physicality,
you’re trying to expand physically.
If somebody expands faster than you,
you say he is greedy.
If they
If you are expanding faster than somebody,
then you think you are successful (Laughter/Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: What stimulates or motivates a leader?
You’ve got there.
A Mahendra Singh Dhoni is there,
right at the top.
What motivates them to achieve more?
Sadhguru: You’re essentially asking what drives them?
Sanjiv Goenka: Yes.
Sadhguru: If they’re driven by something,
they shouldn’t be leading anything in my opinion.
When you drive,
you’re not driven.
You are driving,
then you’re a leader.
If you’re driven by something,
then you’re also a slave
but you have a bunch of slaves behind you.
Whether your ambition drives you,
or your god-given mission drives you,
or your greed drives you,
or whatever drives you,
if something is driving you,
in my opinion,
I wouldn’t call that person a leader.
Nothing drives you.
I’m made like this.
I really have no need for action.
If I close my eyes and sit here,
I can sit here till I fall dead.
Really,
I can simply sit.
I’ve simply no need for action,
but all the time I’m on.
People think I have a mission.
There is no mission.
I see an enormous longing in people around me.
I see it's needed.
So I do what I can do.
People call this all kinds of things,
“Oh, Sadhguru is twenty hours a day,
seven days.
How can he do this?
He must be having god talking to him every day (Laughs).”
No.
This is just this –
if you just pay attention to this (Referring to oneself),
every human being is capable of knowing this (Referring to oneself).
The very body that you carry,
you created from inside.
There is an intelligence here (Referring to oneself),
there is a competence here (Referring to oneself),
which is capable of transforming a piece of bread into a complex machine called human mechanism.
This (Referring to oneself) is the most complex piece of technology on the planet.
You agree with me?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Those of you who’re engrossed with your phones, I’m asking you (Laughter).
This is the most complex piece of technology.
This, you’re capable of making
with a piece of bread, or a mango, or a fish, or whatever you eat.
Now, if you can tap into this intelligence,
even if a drop of this intelligence,
which can make bread into body,
came into conscious access,
suddenly life would become magical.
This is what every human being has to do
because the highest form of intelligence is right here,
not here (Gestures) –
it's right across.
Right now we’re mistaking intellect for intelligence.
Intellect is like a knife,
it cuts through a few things.
It helps you with survival
but it doesn’t show you the nature of life.
It doesn’t give you access to life.
In fact, it chops off everything.
If you apply your intellect too much to anything and everything,
everything gets chopped up.
It's… It's a good instrument for dissection
when you want to know something.
So… (Laughs)
Our
Today our science has entirely become dissection.
This works okay when you’re doing some material stuff.
But now, you want to know your mother very well,
so you dissect her.
No,
I’m
Please, this is not the way,
okay?
This is not the way.
You must keep your instrument of dissection aside
and see how to embrace and include somebody,
only then you know them.
By dissection you may see their liver, kidney, spleen
but you won't know that piece of life in any context, isn't it?
So the problem is just this –
that,
we think a leader means he must be boom boom,
slogan shouting,
fired up.
No.
I think leadership has to mature into a place
A leader must be someone
who has transcended his own needs.
There is nothing driving him.
Then he will do what is needed.
This is what I’m trying to create with every human being in the world –
that is,
you’re no more in pursuit of happiness,
you’re blissed out by your own nature (Applause).
When you’re not in pursuit of happiness,
you’re no more a vested interest in the world.
You will do what is needed.
But when you’re in pursuit of happiness –
“If I do this I will find happiness,
if I do that I will get fulfillment,
or if I get this I will get fulfillment” –
when you’re in such a state,
knowingly or unknowingly,
you’re a vested interest.
Knowingly or unknowingly,
you will cause much harm.
People may not realize that right now.
Generations later people will look back and say,
“Look at the things they did in the past.”
But if you’re joyful and blissful by your own nature,
your intelligence will function in a completely different way.
You will do just what is needed.
Another thing is
you are free from the fear of suffering.
Only and only when you’re free of fear of suffering,
will you stride full-stride in your life.
Otherwise,
every step is a half a step –
“What will happen,
what will happen,
what will happen?”
“Whatever happens, this is how I will be” –
if this assurance comes to you,
then you would explore your life in many, many ways
than you are doing, right now, isn't it?
This one thing must happen for every leader.
This is the reason why last twenty years we’ve been focusing on the leadership in the world –
political,
business,
bureaucratic leadership,
all kinds.
This is about twelve, thirteen years ago
someone very prominent person came to the Yoga Center
and they went through the Inner Engineering program
and they said,
“Sadhguru, this is fantastic,
but what about the nation?”
So I told them,
“See, I have a clear cut plan.
I have listed out 2000 people.”
I’m not talking about Prime Ministers,
Chief Ministers because they come and go.
You know, the life of a democratic leader may be five years or ten years at the most,
some may last a little longer.
But generally that’s all it is.
But there are another set of leaders –
business leaders,
bureaucratic leaders,
social leaders
who are there for a solid twenty-five - thirty-year span.
In many ways,
these are the people,
who ultimately are the legs for any political leadership.
They are the people who actually deliver the goods.
So I said,
“See, I have a list of 2000 people.
You get me these 2000 people in the next four years,
you will see in the next eight to ten years
you will see a significant transformation in the country.”
We’ve been going at it,
nearly fourteen, fifteen years I think now.
I think we have touched about forty-two to forty-three percent of this leadership
and they’re making a quiet difference (Applause).
I’m here with you for the same purpose (Laughter/Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: But Sadhguru, tell me one thing
one of my closest friend’s wife had a very bad back problem
and now she is doing yoga,
and it seems she will be able to avoid surgery,
and she will get cured hopefully by yoga.
How do we take this science,
which energizes the body,
to the youth of the country?
Sadhguru: The youth of any nation has some level of volatility
and some level of confusion.
But right now
the youth in India in many ways are at crossroads.
They do not know culturally
whether they want to fall this way or that way.
Usha has successfully you know,
straddled the two worlds.
Look at her how she looks,
but she’s a rock singer, okay (Laughter)?
So others are all struggling how to
you know,
they don’t know whether to get totally westernized or stay Indian,
somebody says Bharat,
somebody says India, you know?
It's a confusion for the youth.
The… Youth means it is humanity in the making,
and terrible things have been happening in the country.
In our country so many things are happening.
In this,
what is happening to children and youth is of great concern
because it seems in the last one year,
1700 children
below sixteen years of age committed suicide in this country.
When children start committing suicide,
we need to understand
we’re doing something fundamentally wrong,
something very fundamentally wrong.
When children below sixteen years of age commit suicide in such numbers
we need to understand,
with grave concern,
that fundamentals are not being handled properly.
I heard this number about four months ago.
Then I told our people
this year for the yoga day
we must touch 10,000 schools.
We must teach yoga in 10,000 schools.
People balked,
but they’ve gotten used to it this… these days, (Laughs)
my aspirations.
10,000 looked like a bi… big number four months ago.
Then I just traveled eight states
and met the Chief Ministers of every state
but all of them came with such enthusiasm
that today we have made MoUs (Referring to a memorandum of understanding that describes an agreement between parties)
with these eight states
and the ninth state is coming through now.
It is going to cross 30,000 schools (Applause).
We
We have trained 45,600 teachers
who in turn will train three teachers in every school
and this is not a one-day thing.
This is
will happen as a part of the school curriculum.
Just twenty minutes a day,
a simple form of what is called as Upa-Yoga.
Upa-Yoga means it’s sub-yoga.
If you teach yoga,
there are certain parameters that you must maintain
because it doesn’t matter how innocuous a yogic practice looks,
every one of them has a spiritual dimension to it.
Simply the way you sit,
the way you breathe, it has.
Without those dimensions, if you teach,
it would be irresponsible.
So we took this Upa-Yoga and
which doesn’t have a spiritual side to it,
which is purely for their physical and psychological well-being.
It is of immense need in the country.
We are probably touching somewhere around seventeen to eighteen million children
between ten to sixteen years of age.
That’s the age group we have chosen.
But this is still a drop in the ocean,
this is not a total solution.
This needs to happen on a much larger scale.
My commitment is
Did all of you brush your teeth today?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Those of you who’re not saying anything, please (Laughter)
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You brushed your teeth today
because the tools for keeping your dental hygiene are with you.
Suppose it was in the hands of the government
or with an organization,
the toothbrush is in my hands.
You have to come every day
and I will brush you (Laughter),
I’m sure many of you would miss it
because the queue, you know?
Now everybody has the tools of their dental hygiene.
Similarly,
every human being should have the tools of self-transformation in their hands.
It should not be in the hands of a guru,
or an organization,
or some other kind of edifice
that has been built (Applause).
Every human being must have access to this.
With this intent we are doing many things.
Fortunately,
I consider myself,
you know, like (Laughs)
I was speaking somewhere
and I said,
“Sadhguru, who is the greatest guru in the world?”
I said, “Of course, me” (Gestures) (Laughter).
Mike Tyson’s posture.
“This is me. I’m the greatest guru.”
They said,
“What’s happened to Sadhguru?”
I said see,
when a Krishna came,
however graceful and fantastic he was,
if he spoke, the gentle being that he was,
if he spoke,
maybe fifty people heard him.
Those behind did not hear.
When a Gautama the Buddha came,
he was little more, you know,
he didn’t have the same aesthetic problems as Krishna.
He was more committed towards his mission (Laughs).
So maybe he spoke little loudly.
Hundred people heard.
Today we have come to a world
where we can sit here and talk to a billion people if we want at once.
So when this kind of situation has come,
a time has come
where everybody should have access to it.
It should not be limited to organizations,
gurus,
scriptures,
this, that.
Every human being,
as they know how to keep their mouth clean,
they must know how to keep themselves clean.
The necessary tools must be made available.
Our commitment is just to offer the tools.
No philosophies,
no belief systems,
no ideologies,
no forming of one more new religion,
but every human being should have the tools
and they must know how to use it.
Today it is possible.
Never before this was possible,
today it is possible (Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: Very often a public display of simplicity is mistaken (Sadhguru laughs) for simplicity itself
and it's regarded as a virtue.
How does one actually impress upon people
that it is not a display of simplicity (Sadhguru laughs)
that is important,
but it is the simplicity of thought
and simplicity of virtue that is more important?
Sadhguru: I would depreciate simplicity of thought.
I think we need a more sophisticated and complexity of thought.
Why do we need simplicity of thought?
Do we want to become earthworms (Few Laugh)?
I know they’re more eco-friendly (Laughter), but
that’s not the idea of being human.
This entire simplicity business has come from very mediocre minds.
Saints and sages of the past, if you look at them,
they lived in accordance to the times in which they lived.
Someone … (Laughs)
I have
Whatever I do, I do it with a certain involvement and passion.
So I drive in a certain way.
So one journalist comes to me and asks,
“Yogis always walked across this country.
You are driving by yourself.
What kind of a yogi are you” (Laughs)?
I said,
“You idiot,
thousand years ago,
not just yogis,
everybody was walking only (Laughter).
Not just yogis,
everybody was walking (Laughs).
So he was also walking.
Now if I walk and go,
you will say,
“See, what a fool he is.”
If I drive,
you will say
“See, he’s driving.”
Will I become more spiritual if I have
if I have a chauffeur driven car?”
So right now, there is this thing
that spirituality is some kind of a disability
because if you say spiritu… “I’m spiritual,”
first thing they will ask you is what are the things you cannot do (Laughter).
They will not ask you what are the things you can do (Laughs).
So, I took it upon myself
to confuse the hell out of people.
Nobody can figure what I am.
I’m many things at the same time.
I have driven in competitive racing.
I have
I’m a licensed rotary wing pilot.
I’m a licensed diver.
I’m many, many things
because spirituality is empowerment.
It is not a disability.
The reason
why most people have rejected spirituality is
because some people projected the idea
if you dress badly,
if you eat badly,
and if you live badly,
you must be spiritual (Laughter).
This has to change.
This has to change.
Everybody needs to understand
what you eat,
what you wear,
where you live is a question of your requirement
and your aesthetic.
How you are within yourself is your spirituality.
Instead of fixing the interiority,
you’re fixing the… paraphernalia, you know?
You’re fixing your clothing.
So, if you just wear a small piece of cloth around your loins,
you will not become spiritual.
If that is the like
that is the way you like it,
you want to keep your life that simple,
it's up to you.
But unfortunately,
people are impressed by this.
No, this should go.
This has to go.
So I think in many ways,
in a very controversial way I’ve set up an example for this (Laughs) that
You know, Donna… Donna Karan and me wanted to come out with a
I design clothes.
I
Everything that I wear is designed by me
and I also design for a few other people (Applause).
So I said
She looked at my clothes and said,
“Sadhguru, you’re the best dressed man in the world.”
I said, “No, no, no.”
She said, “Yes, really. I’ve never seen anybody with your sense of color and texture and stuff.
We must design clothes together.”
I said, “Okay,
I’ll give one week.
One week let's design something.”
“But,” she said, “I don’t know how to design men’s clothes.”
I said, “What's the problem?
I will design women’s clothes (Laughter).
There is more options and more creativity there.”
Well, I didn’t get the time to do it but hope I’ll do it someday (Laughs).
So this idea of simplicity has destroyed many things.
At certain times, certain people
Somebody who lived in the jungle dressed in a certain way
but even they, when they came to the city,
in those days, whatever was formal they wore those things.
People’s idea of spirituality or yogis and saints,
I think these are yogis who have fallen out of the calendar images,
okay (Laughs)?
Sanjiv Goenka: We’re getting on in time.
This can go on.
But it's time to take questions from the audience.
We will take two questions.
Sadhguru: Please take the microphone
If you raise your hand,
the microphone will come to you.
Yes.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Speaking of gods and goddesses
Sadhguru: I’m sorry
Questioner: Speaking of gods and goddess,
Kolkata is a place replete with Kali and Durga Maa
celebrating slain of Mahishasur.
You have also created Mahishasur at Linga Bhairavi’s feet.
What is the connection and spiritual significance of Devi slaying the demon
and why under Linga Bhairavi also? Thank you.
Sadhguru: Hey, we didn’t talk about guts, gumption and gods.
Sanjiv Goenka: We didn’t (Sadhguru Laughs)
Sadhguru: She is bringing us to the gods.
Sanjiv Goenka: Yes
Sadhguru: I want you to mentally gear yourself up for this.
I want you to understand this land,
this culture is a godless culture.
Never before ever in this country
have we projected the god any time.
We always told you your life is your karma –
that means your life is your making.
Everything that you are is a consequence of what you do to yourself
either consciously or unconsciously.
If you do it consciously,
it’ll turn out the way you want it.
If you do it unconsciously,
it’ll turn out some other way
and you think something did it to you.
So, when we said it's your karma,
it meant that you are the maker of your life.
But gods and gods and gods
I’m sorry,
goddesses also –
there is a gender issue (Laughs).
We say that there are thirty-three million gods and goddesses.
This thirty-three million happened
when our population was thirty-three million.
Since then we’ve gotten little shy of creating gods
because people from outside came without understanding
the science and technology of god-making.
They said you are,
you know,
multiple gods you are worshipping,
that’s not how it is,
we know there is only one god.
Everybody made up their gods,
some have forgotten but we know.
That’s a big difference.
Making up the god does not mean just imagine something.
That is how it's happened in variety of cultures
but in this culture we evolved the technology of god-making.
When I say technology of god-making,
I don’t know if this word is alive in Bengal,
but in the south,
the deity is also referred to as a yantra.
Is that there?
No?
Yes or no?
Sanjiv Goenka: Yantra?
Sadhguru: Is the deity also referred to as a yantra?
Sanjiv Goenka: Well, in North India for sure.
Sadhguru: It is.
Sanjiv Goenka: It is.
Sadhguru: Okay, in south, it's very much alive.
You must understand, the word yantra means a machine
or a form that works for you.
Why do we create machines?
Why did we come up with a bicycle?
We can walk.
Because we are capable of locomotion,
we walked for some time –
it was not good enough,
so we came up with a bicycle to enhance our ability to
our locomotive capabilities.
We enhanced it further,
we made it into a motorcycle,
we made it into an airplane,
we made it into many, many things.
All this, only because we are capable of locomotion.
If we were made like trees,
we wouldn’t have come up with bicycles.
Right now because we can speak
we have come up with a microphone,
we have come up with a telephone,
we have come up with all kinds of phones.
Because we can see,
we came up with a microscope,
a telescope and many kinds of scopes.
Every machine that we have created
is only enhancement of the faculty that we already have.
We did not come up with any machine
which does something different from us.
It only does the same thing in a better way.
We can t… see till there (Gestures) –
we have a telescope and we can see very far.
We can speak here but you wouldn’t hear,
so we have a microphone.
Now we are speaking to the entire hall.
So everything,
every machine is only an enhancement of our existing faculties.
Similarly, as we have created machines,
we created subjective machines.
This is what we called as the deities or the murtis
or today being referred to as gods in English language.
These are machines which could do something for us that we ourselves cannot do.
There are any number of
innumerable examples where people have used their deities or murtis or yantras in ways
which have made them into incredible human beings.
One which is right now circulating around the world because of this movie - what –
The man who knew infinity, whatever,
Ramanujam you’ve heard of –
Ramanujam just poured out mathematics,
unlearnt,
simply poured out.
People asked him,
“Where does this come from?”
He says, “My goddess, she just drops
she just bleeds mathematics.”
The things that he wrote in early twentieth century
are still being figured today
and in 2010 they realized
some of the formulas that he built are actually describing the black holes (Laughs).
In early twentieth century,
there was no concept of black hole
but he created a mathematical backbone for black holes
which he did not know about,
nor did anybody know about.
He said,
“My goddess just pours mathematics for me.”
So like this,
these are subjective tools with which you can open up a certain window into existence.
I am a living example,
unlettered (Laughs),
happy being illiterate.
The only qualification I have is,
with great care I remained uneducated (Applause).
Yes.
No, no.
You think education is a difficult thing.
No.
Remaining uneducated takes a lot more
because
from the first day you’re born,
your parents, every other adult, teachers,
pandits, priests, mullahs,
all kinds of people,
everybody is busy teaching you something
that has not worked in their life (Laughter/Applause).
Yes.
If somebody gives you any advice,
first look at their face (Laughter) –
are they really more joyful than you (Laughs)?
Why I’m saying this is,
if something has worked for somebody,
it should have made him into a really exuberant life, isn't it?
Suppose somebody comes and gives you
your neighbor comes and says
“I have a special manure for your mango tree,”
you must look at his mango tree –
how many fruits (Laughter).
Yes or no?
Before you apply that manure to your mango tree,
you must see in his mango tree how many fruits are there.
If his mango tree is laden with fruit unlike yours,
then yes,
you must take his manure
otherwise you should not.
All the teachers,
including the parents,
I’m asking you, between you and your children,
who is more joyful?
Participants: Children
Sadhguru: Then who should be a consultant for life (Laughter/Applause)?
So, these are tools.
When I referred to, you know,
if I...
Whenever I refer to Dhyanalinga as a tool,
people get very upset,
“Sadhguru, it's more than our life.
Don’t call it a tool.
It's such a mundane, crude word.”
Then I tell them,
“You do one thing.
You come to the yoga center.
I’ll give you plumbing job,
no tools,
you can use your hands, your teeth, whatever you want.
Three days, work without spanners,
winch (wrench?), this, that, nothing –
everything will be bleeding.
On the third day,
I will give you a spanner.
Will you worship the spanner or no” (Laughter)?
You do not know the power of the tool.
As human beings we are who we are
only because of our ability to create and use tools, isn't it?
Otherwise a colony of ants would dominate us,
believe me.
We know how to use tools.
That is what sets us apart.
So, we built subjective tools which,
today, are getting referred to as gods.
We appropriately called them as yantras
because these are machines which work for us.
So for this, we had a certain way to operate a certain machine,
how to access this particular machine (Referring to oneself) –
a particular sound pattern,
a particular form,
a particular process.
These processes unfortunately in many places might have gotten distorted,
but if a deity is alive,
if you know how to use it,
it can do incredible things for you.
This is not belief system,
this is not religion,
this is technology,
technology of another kind (Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: We have a question from Ravichandran Ashwin on video.
Can we take that?
Sadhguru: Okay.
Is he going to spin me out or what?
Ravishankar Ashwin: Hello, Sadhguru.
I’m basically a very ambitious person in life.
Anything that I want to do I
I think I should excel in it.
And hence what happens is,
I get into a lot of conflicts in terms of other people.
I generally try and shun people out of my life as much as possible (Sadhguru laughs).
When I seek excellence, there are always
these obstacles that come in between.
But what I want to understand is
the disturbance that this creates as a process it puts in our mind, heart.
So I would like to handle it much better.
And if there is a way that we can sort this disturbance out,
I would like to know how.
Sadhguru: If you want to excel in something,
as I earlier said,
you think excellence also is your ambition.
Ambition means you’re tweaking your desire.
Desire need not be tweaked.
Your competence need to be tweaked.
Tweaking the competence,
nobody can come in the way
because you’re doing something with yourself.
When your competence reaches a certain level of excellence,
others will stand by and watch anyway.
When you spin them out,
even the batsman will stand and watch
his wickets fall (Both laugh)
because there is a certain excellence.
So excellence is not something that you do with the world –
excellence the… is something that you do with yourself.
Suppose you’re managing large situations,
teams and organizations,
then it involves everybody.
When it involves everybody,
there is a certain aspect.
See, the problem is,
we are always either looking up to something
or looking down on something.
This is something we must understand.
This is one thing all of you should do –
that is,
don’t look up to anything,
don’t look down on anything.
If you just bring this
This is not simple.
This is not as simple as it sounds
because the moment you say something is good,
you look up to it.
The moment you say something is bad,
you look down on it.
Just bring this equanimity in you –
you don’t look up to something,
you don’t look down on something.
You look at everything just the way it is.
Only if you see life just the way it is,
can you conduct it to the best of your ability.
If you think something is good,
it gets exaggerated in a positive way.
If you think something is bad,
it gets exaggerated in a negative way.
The moment you exaggerate something in your mind,
you’re not seeing things the way they are.
Once you don’t see things the way they are,
excellence will be of another world.
It will… You will never touch it.
So people are not in the way of your excellence.
Nobody is.
It is just that you are treating excellence as an ambition.
No.
Excellence is self-transformation (Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: There is a question from the Rising Pune Super Giants cricket team page.
Sadhguru: This is a fixed question (Laughter).
Sanjiv Goenka: It's
Well, it's not a fixed question
but it's a
Sadhguru: All right (Laughs).
Sanjiv Goenka: It's a… It’s a preset question.
Sadhguru: All right.
What's the question?
Sanjiv Goenka: I think it's
Sadhguru: Oh, they’re coming on the video.
Okay.
Sanjiv Goenka: It's coming….
Sadhguru: Who is asking the question?
The coach
or the captain
or the bench?
Sanjiv Goenka: No
Sadhguru: What happened?
Sanjiv Goenka: Lokanetraji says no.
Can we take one question from the audience?
Sadhguru: Anybody, please take the microphone.
Questioner: Sadhguru, I have a question.
Sadhguru: Where is…
Where are you?
Questioner: I am here. Sadhguru,
this side.
Sadhguru: Where is here?
Where…
Which is this side?
Questioner: This side (Laughter).
I’m here Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Okay.
Questioner: First of all, thank you for making it to Kolkata.
We expect you more often in Kolkata.
Sadhguru, for centuries,
we have thought education is a solution. Knowing will be doing.
Now today we are living in a world where every information,
every knowledge, every profound thing is available at the click of a mouse.
But yet, problems have only got compounded.
Sadhguru: Oh, you’re still on the mouse,
you’re not on the phone,
hmm?
Questioner: Pardon?
Sadhguru: You’re still on the mouse –
that’s an ancient tool (Laughter).
You’re not on your phone.
Questioner: Yeah. So all these years we have believed that,
you know if we know things, if we know what is right and you know,
life will get transformed.
Today, the problem that
I personally face and I feel
feel so many people
I have done Shambhavi.
Now the question is,
every morning when I … rise,
it becomes a some kind of a challenge, you know,
whether I do it or I don’t do it.
Execution in our lives has become a challenge.
So, what is even… say,
you’re touching the 30,000 schools and the children.
What will ensure that what the tools are,
whatever tools of transformation they learn,
that gets followed up in their life.
How
How does the execution part gets taken care of.
That’s my question.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Now, with the children,
with the schoolchildren, it's
we are not teaching it to the children,
we are teaching it to the teachers
and it is going to become a part of their curriculum,
so they will do it anyway.
At least the five days in the school, it will happen.
The other two days we don’t know.
We are trying to involve the parents.
If that happens, it’ll happen at home also.
About you, every day struggling whether to do Shambhavi or not,
I want you to understand
I invested my life, and my time,
and my energy to make this happen for you.
And now if you’re not doing it,
you’re not just wasting your life,
you’re trying to waste my life.
I don’t… I take that very seriously (Laughter/Applause)
and that’s not a good karma for you (Few laugh).
So tomorrow morning, the thing is just this –
if those first six months we told you that you set it up –
this discipline –
if you had done it, by now,
Shambhavi would be a process that’ll bliss you out every morning.
If something becomes a very sweet experience,
nobody has to tell you to do it.
It is only initially till you realize the nature of what it is,
you need some (Gestures) force.
So that’s why we asked you to take a commitment.
I’m sure you didn’t keep it up,
but now that you asked this question now,
next six months you must do it, okay?
Otherwise I’m coming (Laughter).
There are millions of people for whom they are looking forward to their Shambhavi
every day
because that is the best twenty-one minutes of their life.
It should become like that.
If something becomes beautiful,
then nobody has to tell you,
“You must do it,”
anyway you will do it.
It will become lot more than
anything that you have known
if you give yourself to it.
There are millions of people,
if they close their eyes in the morning,
tears of ecstasy are coming.
Do they need to determine themselves they must do it?
They’ll anyway do it.
Sanjiv Goenka: Friends,
I think in the interest of the schedule,
we must call this to an end.
Participant: Last question.
One,
one
Sadhguru: I’m okay. It’s (Laughs)
Sanjiv Goenka: Okay.
Questioner: Hello, hello
Sadhguru: Somebody got the microphone.
Questioner: Pranam Sadhguru.
Sanjiv Goenka: Can we take it from the lady there, then?
Another Questioner: One question.
Questioner: Important question for me, please.
Knowing who I am is not enough
because if you are
Sadhguru: Where are you?
Where are you?
Questioner: …if you
Sadhguru: Hello (Laughs),
where are you?
Questioner: Sadhguru, here.
Sadhguru: Here means where (Laughter)?
Questioner: Balcony.
Sadhguru: Oh!
Sanjiv Goenka: I think
Questioner: Balcony, here,
I’ve raised my hand.
Yeah.
What my question is –
knowing oneself not intellectually but truly,
the I am-ness, being-ness is still not enough
because the mind still traps you
and enslaves you.
Sadhguru: No, you must ask the question
Questioner: Though the frequency
Sadhguru: You must ask the question and leave it.
If you ask the question and also give your own answer,
what to do (Laughter)?
Questioner: No, no, what I’m saying is what to do?
Sadhguru: What to do about what (Laughter)?
Questioner: No, what I’m saying is even if one knows oneself
as the being-ness and I am-ness not intellectually but truly,
still it is not enough
because still the mind traps you
though the frequency becomes less.
One more… Another thing –
you claim to stop people from getting enlightened
because they may die.
It is so ordinary and obvious thing to know oneself,
then how… how can one die?
And how can one stop another person from getting enlightened?
Thank you, Sadhguru (Laughter).
Sadhguru: I don’t need to stop you (Laughter) (Laughs).
Most people are doing a good job with themselves.
I don’t have to stop them.
It's only a few whose
You must understand this.
The problem is,
too many books are printed telling you all these things –
being-ness and this-ness and that-ness –
too much jargon.
Nothing happens like this.
You must understand this –
if in some way,
any one aspect,
if something is happening which is genuine –
because your mind can deceive you in a million different ways –
if something genuine is happening,
at least one aspect of your physicality you will transcend.
That is the test for you.
Tonight just like that,
without drinking a mug of coffee or tea,
just like that,
simply without doing anything no party,
no nothing,
just sit up and see if you can just stay awake,
just like that, the entire night.
I’m saying if something has happened within you,
at least one aspect of your physicality would be transcended.
It's not that forever you need not sleep,
just try one night if it's possible.
So, just one
Or try not going to the bathroom for twenty four hours –
anything (Laughs)!
Transcend something, let me see.
Because if you have hit something beyond physical nature,
this is a clear thing that happens to you.
Many things that you thought were impossible to go beyond,
suddenly they are behind you.
Check it out (Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: Well friends,
I think all good things must end as must this.
For me,
it's been not only a privilege but a blessing.
I think
there is something to be learnt from every word that Sadhguru says.
I think all of us are privileged,
happy
and blessed.
Thank you, Sadhguruji (Applause).
Sadhguru: I would… I would like to
I would like to use this opportunity to just say this - that,
it is… it is wonderful and truly heartening to see
that across the world,
today the business leadership is beginning to look at the inner dimension,
not entirely yet
but they’re beginning to, all over.
Every business school is interested (Laughs).
They
They’re trying to hire me as their professors,
as a professor for a week,
ten days in a year which I’m not able to do.
But every top business school wants a spiritual element
which is a very good sign
because what spiritual process means is just this –
when your identification shifts beyond your physicality,
when your experience of life transcends physicality,
it is spiritual.
Spiritual - it's the most malign word I know.
Spirituality doesn’t mean looking up, looking down,
it's about turning inward.
You have touched something which is beyond physicality.
The significance of this is just this –
if you touch something beyond physical nature,
that means you have touched something which is boundless in nature.
You’ve
You have left the world of boundaries behind you,
that’s what it means.
Those who are enabled
in terms of leadership –
either political,
bureaucratic,
business, whatever –
in whichever form, if you’re in some state of leadership,
one thing that needs to happen is,
you must evolve yourself beyond the world of boundaries.
If you live in the world of boundaries
and get hugely empowered,
you’re bound to create some kind of a conflict
which is destructive in nature.
Particularly the business leadership today
because there was a time
when the religious leadership on the planet
was the most influential leadership
but then the military machines on the world
in the world built up.
Then the military leaders became the most influential leaders.
But in the last hundred years,
the democratically elected leaders have become most powerful.
But a time is coming,
in the next fifteen to twenty-five years –
you will see the economic or the business leaders
will rule the world in many ways.
But the business leaders,
unfortunately, have a tag around their neck
saying that they are vested interests.
They are here just to make money.
It is a time
It is a wonderful happening that
a whole lot of business leaders are looking towards spirituality.
This means
Spirituality does not mean going to the temple,
going to heaven,
no.
It means moving from a world,
or a dimension of boundaries,
to a dimension of boundlessness.
Once you’re empowered,
it is important that you go beyond your boundaries.
Your boundaries should not rule you
and in the next twenty-five years,
you will see across the world,
the business leadership will determine
what happens in this world.
Today itself it is true.
The success of a nation is not determined by the success of the military forces
or even the political process.
It is the success of the businesses of a nation
which determines the success of the nation
and the well-being of the nation.
When such a responsibility has come,
I
it is my aspiration to move every business leader
from personal ambition to a larger vision,
which brings well-being to everyone.
Thank you very much for Sanjiv
for being here on this day (Applause).
Sanjiv Goenka: Thank you.
(Sadhguru): A certain scientist in United States
was working on the impact of cannabis
on human consciousness.
For almost eighteen years
the United States Government gave him
thirty kgs of Marijuana per year
to experiment .
Eighteen years of experimentation he produced nothing.
So during the late eighties
when the drug situation was getting bad
and they cut this quota
thirty kgs of marijuana that they were giving to him
nothing doing
we don’t know where it is going,
this thirty kgs.
Because you have done nothing.
He tried to explain that he has done so many things
but still it has not come to conclusion
but they said nothing doing and cut the marijuana quota.
So he moved to Israel.
The Israel government looked at his work
and they decided to give him.
So they gave him the same thirty kilos of marijuana
for another six to eight years.
Then he came up with this:
He actually produced proof
that within the human brain,
every human brain
there are millions of cannabis receptors
so this information
what to with this they do not know
they threw it across
they gave it to anthropologists
they gave it to the physiologists
they gave it to the neurologists
they gave it to all kinds of people.
There are millions of cannabis receptors in the human brain
what is the explanation?
How?
Why?
So anthropologists said may be at some point in history
may be everybody was doping,
which cannot be;
because in many parts of the world it doesn’t even grow.
So various kinds of explanations came;
nothing sensible came out of it.
Then the neurologists
after about two and a half years of looking into this in various levels
they said when human being is in a certain state of experience
the human system itself
produces the necessary chemicals for which it is waiting.
So these millions of cannabis receptors
are waiting for you to produce it.
Those who could not produce it
they tried to put it from outside
and damaged the system.
Look at me I am always blissed out.
Look into my eyes and see I am stoned.
Never been on any substance
but always stoned.
Because the very system does this.
So in india
there has been enormous –
in the yogic systems
there has been enormous focus on the pineal gland you know?
You know the pineal gland?
For a long time
the modern medicine almost ignored it.
They said there are so many things in this body
which we are not bothered about.
Because it is not concerned about day to day health situations.
Today the maximum that they have come to is
they are beginning to say
this secretions of the pineal gland
if they are on
if they are active
there will be no mood swings in you.
That’s not the point.
There is a whole system of yoga
to activate the pineal gland
if you activate this
and if it generates sufficient amount of secretion
you will be ecstatic every moment of your life.
Simply every cell in your body will be bursting
all the time.
Now when you are like this,
if you eat,
if you don’t eat,
if you sleep,
if you don’t sleep,
nothing matters.
Because you are blissed out.
In this state everything is effortless
just doesn’t matter
you can function at your best
because you can effectively use your body and mind at its best.
There is enough medical proof for this.
Only when you are in utmost pleasantness
otherwise you cannot use your body;
you cannot use your mind to its fullest.
Both this body and this mind will
you can explore the full potential of what it is
only when you are in a sustained level of pleasantness within you.
Otherwise you are a damn issue by yourself.
All the time you are an issue by yourself,
it doesn’t work.
So whatever the effort that a human being is making
whether he goes to the temple
goes to the bar
wants to go to the heaven
this is the whole effort isn’t it?
Isn’t this the whole effort?
He wants something larger than what is happening now
to happen to him
isn’t it so?
Is not the reason why he is drinking
why he is praying
why he is drugging
and why he thinks he wants to go to heaven?
He wants something more to happen isn’t it?
Look at this simply
something more will happen
only if your perception is enhanced.
Not otherwise.
Is that so?
So the whole system of yoga
is only focused towards enhancing the perception.
If your perception is enhanced
something more you don’t have to look for it.
It is happening in such proportions
you have to learn to handle it.
Big things will happen
(Sadhguru): So I was in America and, you know
some people they have a big problem with the word Guru -
it’s a four-letter word you know (Laughter).
They don’t mind the other four letter words (Laughter).
This four letter word is a Guru,
why are you a Guru?
This is what a lady asked me,
“Why are you a guru” (Laughter)?
Oh (Laughs)!
Because you are in a state right now,
you don’t see what’s around you only when your eyes are open.
Even with your eyes closed imagery is going on, isn’t it?
You must understand
the function of the eyelid is
if you close it, world is out,
that’s the purpose.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: The function of the eyelid is
see the camera has a camera cap,
if you put the cap
world is out for the camera,
yes?
That is what an eyelid is,
it’s like a camera lens cap
If you put the cap,
if you still see
you lost it (Laughter).
Yes or no?
If you put the cap and you still see it,
you definitely lost it.
Or in other words the fundamental faculties of your mind,
which is memory and imagination -
both are out of control.
You don’t know how to make use of your memory,
you do not know how make of… make use of your imagination.
You suffering yesterday and tomorrow is just this -
you lost control over your memory and imagination.
If you had control over your memory and imagination
I would treat you as my colleague, tch.
But now you lost control
over your memory and imagination essentially means
you should have been in an asylum.
Because there is not enough infrastructure (Laughter),
instead being in a mental asylum
you’re in Mumbai (Laughter).
Yes!
You lost control over your memory and imagination means
you have no ability
to make use of the faculty of the mind
in the way you could
if you had control over these two things.
Something is happening
your idea of success is you made a living, tch.
Okay.
You made a living little better than your neightbor
your neighbor has a Maruti,
you have a Mercedes,
this is your great success.
Suppose tomorrow we distribute Mercedes to everybody (Laughter),
you wouldn’t want to get into it,
yes?
So you have no appreciation of the technology of Mercedes,
your only thing is
See because I was (Laughs)
I was in conversation with Ratan Tata,
who is into auto industry -
more than the industry
he is a passionate auto person, okay?
So once we sat together
we were not talking spirituality or business,
we were talking only cars and… you know machines.
So when we… looking at these things
see the thing is just this,
if you look at the advertisements
in the newspapers for cars,
I look “Okay any new model”,
I’m looking it up I’m not intending to buy it
but I am interested to know what is coming, what is going.
I look at it,
they say leather seats,
you know wood-finish in the… this thing,
paint job like this -
I’m looking what’s the engine,
what’s the transmission,
what is the gearing system,
what’s the gear issue I want to know -
nothing.
Only leather, paint work, stereo system (Laughter) -
goddammit this is not what a… makes a car,
this is a living room (Applause).
A car means what’s the engine,
what’s it’s torque
what’s it’s BHP,
what is the transmission,
what is the gearing,
how does it behave,
what does it do?
No, no, it’s about the paint work
because the car is about how shiny it is
and how it blinds your neighbor (Laughter),
you know
unfortunate
So because you’ve made your life this way
that the quality of your life is determined
by the opinion of your neighbor -
whether the neighbor is next door or somewhere else -
somebody else
somebody else’s opinion determines the nature of your life
because eyes open and eyes closed
you are still seeing the same world.
You have to at least come
earn this much in your life
if you put the lens caps it should be over,
yes?
You should not see anything -
if you see things that means you lost it.
Don’t think you’ve become spiritual.
“No Sadhguru when I close my eyes I see Shiva,”
you definitely lost it (Laughter).
You’re not just a nut
you’re a religious nut. (Laughter)
Participant: for every action to happen,
there’s… there’s first needs to have a intellectual understanding
and there is sense of urgency.
So I’m addressing this question from a larger context,
not just planting trees.
How to have a persistent sense of urgency?
Sadhguru: Now
the planting trees thing came up
essentially because we wanted to save the soil of Tamil Nadu.
We were not thinking of saving the world.
Because the soil is getting destroyed so rapidly.
Once you destroy the soil,
it doesn’t matter what you do,
what your intentions may be,
you’re willing to do,
put the whole economy of the nation into planting trees,
it’s not going to work.
So saving the soil was our most important concern;
that’s why we went to the farmers
and told them to bring in a certain amount of trees
into their farm.
About once… spreading awareness and identity
identity is not an issue
because in this country,
particularly in this culture,
there is a very strong identification with the land.
Still seventy percent of the population is in agricultural activity
and even those people who are in the city
they spend still at least, I would say,
ten percent or fifteen percent of the urban population in the country
still goes back to their village roots,
at least for a short period of time in a year.
So they still have that agro connection.
Probably in… in larger… I mean in other countries in the world,
most of them will never go back to the village.
But here they still go back
because their relatives are in the village,
half the family is in the village,
so they have that identity with the land.
We have to exploit that identity now.
We have to make that identity grow in them
that your identification fundamentally is with the land.
Because what you call as myself,
this very body is a piece of this planet.
So this is
this is the identification which we brought about
with Project Greenhands.
When I just… this one thing
just fired up millions of people,
when I told them
see what you exhale is the tree’s inhalation,
what the trees exhale is your inhalation,
what does that mean
that means half your lungs is hanging out there.
It’s not a tree,
it’s one part of your lung.
When they… when they saw something so simple,
yes it’s true.
I cannot breathe with these lungs
unless that lung is breathing.
So that is my extended lung.
So protecting that becomes natural.
So this identification is already there.
We have to enhance it,
and strengthen it
particularly in the younger generation
who are going to be active in the next twenty five years.
We have to strengthen this identification.
People are identified with their
caste, creed, religion, nationality.
All this is fine.
But the most fundamental identity is
you’re a piece of this planet.
Your very body that you carry is a piece of this planet
and half your lungs is hanging out there on the tree.
I want you to feel it,
not just think it’s a great idea.
It’s not an idea,
it is a reality that we are living, isn’t it?
This reality has to sink into people.
You don’t have to talk about identifying themselves
with the tree.
If… If you sit in front of a tree or under a tree and breathe
consciously, you know there is a big difference.
There’s a big difference.
Sitting in the building and breathing,
sitting under a tree and breathing,
there is a big difference;
one can feel it.
I want people to feel it.
But there are not enough trees for all of us to sit under.
We need to plant them.
I would like to specially acknowledge
Jacques Yves Rocher
fifty million trees in the next
her company is doing seven thousand mega watts of power
from just phoo… (wind mill project)
So I want you to see them not as people.
I want you to see them as solutions for the future.
They are the solutions for the future. (Applause)
What we need to do is
Right now, they are just two sitting here,
we need to do multiplication.
We need to increase their numbers.
We need to increase their numbers means
they must be recognized.
People should know that people are making these contributions.
I want you to talk about it.
A French man is coming to Tamil Nadu
and planting fifteen million trees in Tamil Nadu,
I want you to talk about it.
It’s very important
that we constantly talk about solutions.
The important thing is that everybody talks about it.
That everybody doesn’t throw up their hands.
Everybody says, yes, there is a solution,
people are working for it, what can I do?
‘What can I do’ will naturally come
when you see people who create solutions are recognized in the world.
Definitely more people will look for solutions.
That’s what we need to do.
(Sadhguru): When we talk about
truth and untruth,
generally we are thinking of truth as a verbal truth that we speak;
I spoke a truth or I spoke a lie.
These verbal truths
or verbal untruth
is a more moral and ethical issue,
not an existential issue,
a social thing
and many times
you know
there is lot of terrorist attacks going around in the world.
You had just one,
we have had plenty back home,
a hall like this is a terrorist paradise,
people packed up like this in one place,
you know they can have a maximum impact.
This is a good place.
No?
So
when I was coming just now,
I met a terrorist,
because everything is quiet here
he didn’t know whether the people inside or not
he’s trapped up,
he asked are there people inside?
Do you want me to tell him the truth or untruth. (Laughter)
You want me to speak the truth or untruth,
what kind of people are you! (laughter)
So
what is truth, what is untruth
it is not in the words that you speak,
it is in the way you hold the life within you.
The nature of existence is such
that it’s all inclusive you know.
You know the ten horrible people in this class
who don’t believe in God
but when the sun comes up in the morning,
you will have ten black spots falling on them.
Hmm,
believers have such hopes.
Now, once sun comes up in the morning it lights up everybody, isn’t it?
What nonsense you believe in
or what nonsense you disbelieve in,
it doesn’t matter,
it just lights up everybody;
whoever opens his eyes for him there’s light to see.
Who you are,
what you are,
what you thinking,
what you doing,
are you this or that?
It doesn’t discriminate,
whether you are a crawling worm or a big human being,
it doesn’t discriminate.
So, the essence in nature of life is all inclusive,
there is no discrimination.
This is the truth.
If you sit here like that,
absolutely all inclusive,
you are in touch with truth,
if you have become a prejudiced exclusiveness,
this is the untruth.
It is not in the words that you speak,
it is in the way you are.
Truth is not something that you can say or not say,
truth is something either you are in touch with it
or you are not in touch with it.
It’s not your doing,
if it’s your doing it must be lie, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
If it was your doing or my doing, it must be a lie isn’t it?
That which is true is always
It is in the lap of truth that we exist,
it is not something that we say or do.
Either we can be in touch with it
or we can be unaware of it
but still it is working;
whether we like it or we don’t like it.
In the very breath that we take, we are inclusive, isn’t it?
Yes,
whether we are willing or unwilling,
in the very breath that we inhale and exhale,
we are all inclusive, isn’t it?
If you become exclusive,
truly exclusive,
you will be dead
but even the dead are inclusive, isn’t it so?
The dead will so easily merge with the planet.
They are also very inclusive.
They are alive are supposed to be consciously inclusive.
Dead are dead so they are unconscious
and they are inclusive.
A litmus test for you
whether you are in touch with truth or not is just this;
if there is any kind of suffering in you right now,
you are not in touch with truth.
If you are in touch with truth,
there can be no suffering in you,
it’s as simple as that.
How deep your suffering is shows
how far away from truth you are right now.
There are many ways to approach this.
We have been trying to open up doors in the last few days,
whatever we have been doing here,
I have been repeatedly saying this;
this is not a teaching,
this is just a method.
Now seeing that my responsibility is limitless,
is not a teaching, it’s just a method.
If you see that,
if you become aware of that,
slowly you become all-inclusive just the way life is,
like every aspect of life is,
inclusive,
you also become inclusive.
If you are accepting what is there right now absolutely,
once again you are inclusive.
They are not two different things,
just different types of vocabulary that’s all.
Essentially,
you want to move from exclusiveness to inclusiveness.
Faith moves mountain.
What mountain?
Faith moves mountain.
-I hear you.
As you said.
- Don't move this mountain, okay?
But it also freezes the mind
so why do we draw the line and we need faith for everything.
- Please take care of this lady...
I don't want you to move this mountain anywhere else
People
who visit the Ashram sometimes I meet them somewhere, and they come and say what a beautiful place you created
I keep telling them I didn't make the mountains
That is the most beautiful aspect of the Ashram is the mountains
So don't move it please
Moving a mountain is a crime
In many ways faith has been a crime on this planet, the worst kind of crime has happened in the name of faith
Yes
Moving a mountain is definitely a crime. You can move somewhere. Don't move the mountain.
So it may move the mountains, but it freezes the mind for sure
when we say faith
We have completely misunderstood. What faith is, it's become a belief system
You believe something and you think you're in some faith
The way the word faith is being used today is a certain set of beliefs is a certain faith
Another set of beliefs is another faith, in that context this could.
if you just believe something hard and fast
because
either you are born into that culture
or somebody has really worked upon you or some other compulsion has made you take to it
the moment you believe this is it
then there is no need for your mind
Mind is a tool for exploration not for drawing conclusions
Unfortunately, most people are using their mind to draw conclusions
This mind is not about drawing conclusions
This is a tool for exploration
that you can continue to look at life in deeper and deeper ways in more profound ways
of experience and knowing
That's the significance of the mind. If you had to just draw conclusions, you don't need such a complex structure of mind
You don't need it
Now, the disease of doubt and suspicion
You try to fix it with faith... No,
you just have to refine your logic. You have to refine the nature of your mind
that
you need to understand that
there is a way to be in this world without taking any position
That's why the postures, yoga postures, you understand
to twist yourself this way that way because
to understand that I don't want to take any particular position in my life
I am not stuck this way or that way, I want to know life from every possible direction
Every possibility that this life is I wish to know when I'm alive
so if that has to happen
you need a flexible mind, a mind that has not taken positions
A mind that does not does not believe or disbelieve something, see you do not think disbelief is an option
Belief and disbelief are not two different things, they're positive belief or negative belief
that's all they are, two different ways of believing, belief and disbelief
So we are not talking about faith versus atheism
belief versus disbelief...
No...We are talking about
why can't you learn to not take a position
of anything. Right now to conduct a particular activity we take positions
but there is no need to take positions to live,
to be alive here. If you want to know life, you should not take any position or any opinion about anything
The moment you form an opinion that means you are not open to anything else, isn't it?
Whether it's about a person, or yourself or about the life around you
You don't form any kind of opinion or conclusion, conclusion means death.
Yes
Life means,
no conclusion, you're looking. Instead of sharpening your vision
you're drawing a conclusion because conclusion brings a certain certainty
It brings a certain confidence, the moment you believe something you're confident
Confidence without Clarity is a disaster
It's better to see clearly
rather than just believe something. If you believe something it gives you confidence and sometimes it works unfortunately
We've been talking about this all the way long, even if you want to cross a street what you need is clarity of vision
not confidence, confidence can kill
Traffic is not much... it works
That's a whole problem with it
Yes, the traffic is not much and it's not fast
then it works. And now you think it works, you apply it everywhere, you'll get hit.
So you don't need
confidence, if you just give up your need for confidence
you're okay being here not knowing anything
Actually you don't know nothing please look at this
You really don't know anything about the nature of this existence, isn't it?
Yes, or no
You don't know when this entire solar system is going to fall apart, maybe it's tomorrow morning. Do you know?
Do you know whether it is going to fall apart tomorrow morning or not , do you know?
You don't know when you'll fall dead. You don't know when it's going to happen, but it's all right
But if you are that kind of a mind which is looking for faith, you know everything, not just here
beyond death, where you will go, what kind of accommodations you'll get there, you know the works
This kind of knowing is what needs to go.
Ah,
an ignorance
which is aware and acknowledged
for yourself that I am ignorant
Is a far more powerful and profound state
then a knowledge that you have concluded about
You have conclusions about everything and everybody. Just try this one simple sadhana in your life, all of you
Whatever conclusions you have about yourself,
about the people around you, about the situations around you, just give it up tonight. Tomorrow morning
just wake up and look at everything fresh
Just do this every day, at least see if you can maintain this for the first one hour after you're awake
You will see it will take lots of work
You understand, it'll take lots of work
24 hours of the day to look at everything fresh. If you're looking at everything fresh, you will not miss a single possibility
Everything is alive to you
Where people see nothing you will see all kinds of things
Where people see problems you will see possibilities in life
But the moment you conclude
If you make conclusions
and you concretize it and then you get it endorsed by heaven, then you're calling that faith
Ignorance endorsed by a great authority will not become truth
This is the biggest problem that people think authority is truth
Now, truth is the only authority in the creation, this existence
Sadhguru: See,
you’re talking about businesses.
Businesses usually,
or initially when they start,
it’s a question of personal success
because of a certain volume,
then it becomes a larger phenomenon in a country or in the world,
but initially it’s a question of personal success.
So that success has a personal stamp on it.
If you want to peel that stamp off
and hand it over to somebody,
there’re many problems.
And there are many things,
in the process of building,
that you have realized which can never be taught to another person,
which they have to imbibe by being around.
There’re many small nuances.
So particularly businesses which are crafted around a person,
it’s very difficult to pass it on.
It takes a certain amount of effort.
It takes years and years of culturing people around you
to be able to pass it on to somebody.
And the effort that it takes to pass it on to people is so much sometimes,
you rather do the work yourself because
it takes so much effort to
pass on a simple nuance of doing something in a particular way
that it feels like it’s better you do it .
And also beyond a certain age,
you don’t care so much about the business
as you cared about it in the beginning.
Now as life ebbs within you,
your concern is more about yourself –
how you are and what’s happening to you and stuff.
So when that’s the thing,
others may be thinking in terms of
“Oh, such a great business,
he’s not passing it on –
what is he doing?
No…”
Succession plan and all these things
others may be thinking because
they’re only looking at the bubble of success,
but that person has done the bubble, blown the bubble
and now he’s matured into looking at his life.
He’s looking at himself, how he eats in the morning
because an entrepreneur doesn’t eat on time,
doesn’t sleep on time,
doesn’t do anything well when he’s building something.
Now he wants to eat well in the morning,
he wants to take a walk,
maybe he wants to golf,
he wants to do something
because he knows whether consciously or unconsciously everybody knows
when the bones start creaking that your time is limited.
Now you start looking – this bubble looks great from outside,
is it worth building?
Is it worth investing more of your time in this?
But at the same time, if you want to pass it on to somebody,
you will have to spend more time on it than you doing it yourself.
So you’re just hoping, you keep doing it
and one day maybe somebody will take over.
Whatever happens, you don’t care –
something will happen. Some… Somebody will take it and run it.
This may be the attitude of many business people
and I’ve… I’ve had very close conversations with people like that
and this is the reality with them
and I don’t blame them.
It’s fine.
That’s why I said right from the beginning,
if your interest is multi-dimensional,
your growth would be multi-dimensional,
you would not feel this lethargy in this.
The succession would naturally come because
you allowed people to be around you to imbibe things.
Not just teaching them -
just allowing them to absorb how things are done.
So, that would make succession very simple.
You don’t have to name –
“Okay, this is the guy.”
Whoever absorbs, one day you will see that
it’s safer in this person’s hands than anybody else’s hands,
so you hand over.
And that person, what he does – what he or she does with it –
is entirely their own,
there is no guarantee, okay?
There’s no guarantee not necessarily
because that person’s responsibility or irresponsibility,
competence or incompetence.
A particular business may be relevant to a particular time,
may not be relevant to another time.
And it’s very difficult to come to terms with that
that what I invested my whole life upon is not relevant
to the next generation of people is something
very difficult for people to come to terms with.
So, entirely changing the very focus of business –
the business itself –
using the financial capabilities that a business has,
to change the very focus.
That level of entrepreneurship is not always there.
I want you to understand,
at some point in life,
at some stage in your life,
human beings lose interest in money.
Only somebody,
who is very rudimentary in his mind,
maintains that interest to the end.
Most human beings lose interest in money
when they reach a certain point in their life.
Initially
Probably, you know,
these sayings are going around –
“Time is money.”
slowly as age creeps in,
you begin to understand that time is not money –
time is life.
So, as that understanding and experience sinks in,
you would want to invest your time in a different way
than just about making money.
Entrepreneurship is essentially
about investing your time to make money.
That’s why I said right from day one,
if your attention and your interest is multi-dimensional
you can succeed as an entrepreneur,
but still you don’t have to be stuck in that one dimension,
which could be  very depressive,
regretful
later on if you spend too much time on it.
It’s good some people choose to just retire no matter what.
Business running well, not well is not my business.
They have the necessary dispassion to hand it over
and sit back and look,
“Okay, if it goes well it goes well,
it doesn’t go well it doesn’t go well.”
Even I could have failed when I did things.
Somebody else is failing – it’s their privilege

Sadhguru: We must understand
the need for violence
is essentially fear.
The more fearful you are
the more the tendency for you to become violent.
You will see people who are fearful,
first thing is they’ll get verbally violent.
If they have
if they …if they find that
whoever is in front of them is physically of less capability,
they will also become physically violent.
Where there is no fear,
the need for violence will come down dramatically.
So
why the fear,
what is the fear about?
Essentially the basis of fear is just this
in this
a vast expanse of creation
this cosmic space
if you are identified yourself as a little body,
this small little person in this vast cosmos,
fear is natural.
Most people are living in ignorance
and trying to avoid fear
but if you really look at it
you are in the middle of nowhere.
Maybe you think ‘I am in Los Angeles or New York’
but actually in this cosmos you are in the middle of nowhere;
your GPS cannot tell you where you are .
If you really look at it, this tiny piece of life
if you are identified only with your biological self -
this tiny piece of life should shiver in terror.
One way of avoiding this is
not look at all those things, things
think you are the greatest nonsense on the planet
and go on,
that’ll work for some time
and when lif e…when life and death gives you a taste of it,
then fear will come anyway.
But transcending fear - what it means is,
if you bring your life in such a way
if you allow your life to happen in a certain way to you,
if your experience of life transcends
the boundaries of your physicality,
if you handle your body in such a way
that your body is as competent as it can be
in the physical world
and your inner experience is beyond
this physicality of who you are,
you will see fear will become equanimous.
One thing is you’re physically competent
which makes you physically efficient
and competent to handle the physical world.
One who is physically fit
walks into physical situations without much fear
simply because of physical competence.
This must be done right from very young age.
Half the children going to school,
you see they’re turning like pumpkins,
drinking corn syrup
So when you become like a pumpkin as a child,
then Halloween works for you,
everything is fearful.
If you are fit and competent
and you are ready to fight the dragons,
then your physical self is competent.
Because of that a whole lot of fear is taken care of.
And the other dimension is,
your inner experience has transcended your physicality,
then there is no fear at all.
Now you have transcended violence on both levels
because physical is always under threat,
we need to understand this.
Physical is not a permanent fixture,
physical is under threat.
When we say we are mortal, what it means is,
physicality is under threat always.
That’s the nature of physicality.
Physicality is not an indestructible process,
physicality is a fragile process.
We can make it strong but it's still a fragile process.
So if these two dimensions are handled
that physical competence of a certain caliber
and an inner experience which is beyond physicality,
fear is handled.
If fear is handled
transcending violence naturally happens.
This is what Kalari is trying to do -
a discipline which brings an enormous physical competence,
at the same time there is a meditative dimension to it
which is striving to bring that experience
beyond physicality
it is not about fighting somebody,
it is about bringing yourself to the ultimate possibility
that you can bring your body and mind to;
and then work on your spiritual process
to transcend these two things.
Transcendence is not an avoidance -
this must be understood.
Transcendence means
you are building something as a solid footstep
over which you can stand
or you can use to step over.
because the fear is essentially
because of fragility of physicality,
and because of this fear the need for violence.
Violence means just this
when my physicality is threatened
I choose to destroy your physicality
that’s all violence is.
So if my physicality is not threatened,
the need for destroying your physicality
has considerably gone down.
There may be other reasons
but still considerably gone down within me.
If there is no threat to my physicality,
the need to destroy your physicality
or harm your physicality has gone down dramatically within myself.
That is one level
and another level is
to have an experience beyond my own physicality,
that even if my physicality is threatened
the need to destroy the physical nature of the other
has gone down because
my experience of life is beyond my physical nature.
It once happened
Gautama the Buddha ...
you heard of him?
Everybody heard of Gautama?
So
Buddha is not his name.
His name is Gautama Siddharta.
He became a Buddha
he is not the only Buddha in the world. There have been thousands of them, and they still are
so Gautama was sitting in a large congregation of people one morning,
an early morning. Earlier than this, ok?
A man arrived
and stood there in the shadows,
this man is a great devotee,
He is a devotee of Rama. You heard of Rama
not running rama
Rama is one of the most popular deities in India
If you do, not already know this in India we have 36 million gods and goddesses. It's a very rich country
so
He is a great Devotee of Rama
the Devotees in India
Not now and not everybody
But those who take this seriously?
They will not utter any other word then the [name] of God that they believe
So if they want you to come they'll say rama rama
They want you to go ram ramif they want something rama rama
No, other word, but rama
The clothes are all printed rama rama. They are only rama rama they live around
They devoted their whole life to God
You're smart, you're not like that
You get you Kept God like insurance
Just in case something goes wrong. I have also paid my premium
Everything that you need to do you do it yourself. [you] [keep] God like insurance
You're smarter, but this man invested his whole life in God total
Age is passing away little doubt has come
Other people here who don't believe in God?
nobody
[no], left is no only one
Okay, what's your [name]?
John John nobody else
so
Let's endowed us come he knows there is God
Just a little doubt suppose. There is no, God I
Am wasting my whole life doing rama rama rama?
See this doubt will come to you only if you invest wholly your whole life you invest, [just] ten minutes in a week
Then you will not get this doubt it's all right. What's the problem?
If you invest your life completely into God, then within three days doubt will come am I wasting my life just doing this
and
There are other people who don't believe see look at this John
He doesn't believe we're him also sun comes up in the morning for him also flowers blossom from him also life happens
Looks like [he's] having a better time than me
So little doubt he knows there is God just a little doubt
Now there is an enlightened being here. He wanted to confirm
but after
Being a well-known Devotee for a long time because he did not just go to the temple he built many temples
At this stage in his life
How to ask whether there is God or not now?
So he came early morning stood in the shadows there and asked this inevitable question is there God
Got the Maloca the man and gave a clear emphatically
this large congregation of disciples
This has always been a struggle in their their mind is there god or no God is there god or no, God?
who
won big relief
Whenever they are such a question to gautama -- he just becomes silent he doesn't say anything
For the first time he gave a clear answer
No, God
Joy spread across the congregation
Just the struggle is the god or no God is over the enlightened one has declared. There is no
God the message spread across the town
through the [day] celebrations happened because
Just imagine the freedom of it. No God means
nobody sitting up there keeping accounts of
What you did and what you did not do to punish you burn you in hell
Or do this or [that] life is completely yours?
So through the day celebrations happened. Everybody is in great joy
The evening once again the congregation is sitting another man came
He also standing in the shadows
This man is a child vaca Charvaka means
In India the groups of people who are known as charvak [us] this [Cherica's] are
out-And-out materialists
They don't believe anything other than what they can see
Probably, this is the only culture that
allows this
You will see actively
missionaries of God going from Village to Village spreading
their God message and
Missionaries have no God going from Village to Village
Arguing with [people] and proving to them how there is no, God?
Probably the only culture that allows that anywhere [else] they would be killed
So if you want you can spread God or if you want you can spread no God this is true Democracy no
this is being there like this for thousands of years people come and set up arguments in the Village and
They prove to you how there is no, God?
So this is an expert Charvaka
Whatever kind of believer. You are if you talk to him for 10 minutes. He'll prove [you] know God
But thousands of people. He's [proved] no. God no. God no. God
age is passing
Little doubt has come suppose there is God
When I go that will he leave me
and
All this believers say that he's got all kinds [of] torture [equipment] up there
So because I went about proving to everybody that he doesn't exist. He may torture me much more
He knows there is no. God. He's proved to thousands of people. There is no God, just a little doubt
Now there's an enlightened being here he wants to confirm. So he appeared [there] in the evening and he
Asked the same inevitable question is there God?
Gautama looked at the man and said yes
once again Turmoil started
Morning. He said no. God they were all really happy in the evening. He says there is God
So what's the game gautama is trying to play?
See if you believe that is God
Or if you believe there is no god, you're in the same boat you believe something [that] you do not know
I Believe this you believe, you belive that, doesn't make any difference. You can believe whatever you want
Yes, everybody can believe whatever they want it need not have anything to do with reality as such
If you see I do not know
the longing to know will arise within [you] if
the longing arises the seeking arises if the seeking arises the possibility of knowing
exists
you you
Participant: Sadhguru, you have, you know, written a piece on karma,
where you have made a statement that you will not grow
unless you create the innermost desire to grow.
So could you elaborate on those thoughts on karma?
Sadhguru: See, desire is not something that you have to create.
Is there somebody without desire, however religious you are?
Is there somebody here without any desire?
People have tried these teachings with you and they have not worked, isn’t it?
They told you, you must give up your desire,
you must be satisfied with what you have,
you must be content
has it worked even for one human being on the planet I am asking?
Has it worked?
A teaching that does not work is just rubbish, isn’t it?
But it’s gone around for too long because of so many reasons,
we will not go into that.
Desire is not something that you create.
It doesn’t matter who you are,
where you are;
there is something within you longing to be little more than who you are right now -
yes or no?
Yes?
If that little more happens, what?
Little more. If that little more happens, what?
Little more. That little more happens, what?
I can go on like this. If I
Why you’re going bit by bit?
I will make you the king or queen of this planet;
will you remain fulfilled?
Don’t look at me hopefully, I will not make such a blunder (Laughter),
I am only saying.
If you become the king or queen of this planet,
will you be fulfilled?
No.
You will look at the stars, isn’t it?
So there’s something within you which is longing to become boundless,
to become infinite.
Now you’re approaching the infinite in installments.
Tch…tch…tch… this is not a good way to go.
In installments can you ever get to the infinite?
Can you count one, two, three, four, five and one day say this is infinite.
You’ll only become endless counting.
You’ll not know the infinite.
This is not the way to approach the infinite.
So the desire is just this.
There is something within you which is always longing to become boundless.
If I set a boundary for you
suppose I imprison you in let’s say, a five x five cubicle, you’ll feel horribly imprisoned.
Tomorrow, we’ll liberate you into a ten x ten cubicle
you’ll feel wonderful for a day and again you’ll feel imprisoned.
Next day we’ll liberate you into a hundred x hundred cubicle.
You’ll beel… you’ll feel great for three days.
Again the same thing.
It doesn’t matter where I set the boundary.
The moment you can feel the boundary, you want to break it, isn’t it?
This is not something cultivated within you.
This is not your entrepreneurial spirit.
This is the nature of life.
Life wants to be something more, all the time.
How much more?
Limitlessly more, isn’t it?
So, ‘more’ is not what you’re looking for.
‘All’ is what you’re looking for.
If you want to take all, can you conquer it?
If you want all… if you want ‘more’, you can conquer.
If you want ‘all’, can you conquer it?
Can you earn it?
So you need to look at it now.
If you want ‘all’, what should you do about it?
If you look at that, you’ll naturally turn spiritual.
(Sadhguru): We’ve come up with the Adiyogi
it took me two and a half years to design this face.
we created dozens and dozens of faces and forms, ,
I somehow could not agree. Every time I describe something
our IT team works on it and comes up with this,
then I don’t like the nose, I don’t like the ears,
I don’t like this, I don’t like that
and it went on for two and a half years,
we came up with many dozens of images.
Finally we arrived at an image somehow.
I thought this represents what we are looking at as Adiyogi.
And now we built one twenty-one feet tall
and he is sitting in America in Tennessee
the Tennessee ashram (Applause).
and
we are in the process of building one which is hundred-and-twelve feet tall
just the face it’s
it’s going to be the largest face on the planet,
just the face (Applause).
One is coming up near the ashram.
We want to put this, four corners of the country.
So I am thinking East means we’ll put it up in Varanasi,
North means somewhere north of Delhi,
West means we are… we were thinking of Rajasthan
but again it’s too far out in the desert,
so West means now we are thinking Mumbai (Applause).
So this is going to be an iconic presence for this city.
The one that we place in the ashram is in a remote place but we want him there.
So he is
nobody can create an Adiyogi for sure
but he largely
this image beginning to represent that it kind of jelled with my mind.
So he has a certain presence
and we’ve also created one foot tall ones and six inches ones, nine inches ones,
all kinds but we want hundred-and-twelve feet tall ones come
because he gave one hundred-and-twelve ways
in which a human being can attain to his ultimate nature.
Because he created hundred-and-twelve ways,
we thought as a acknowledgement for providing us one hundred-and-twelve ways
through which we can know,
still being in the body
He also mentioned this.
When Parvati challenged him, “Why can’t there be more,”
and they went through that whole drama.
Then he said, “Hundred and twelve ways if you are rooted in the body.
If you are not rooted in the body then
as many atoms there are in the cosmos that many ways are there” (Applause).
So even if you are rooted in the body one hundred and twelve ways.
So we thought we cannot build something as many atoms in the universe.
So hundred and twelve ways
for those who are rooted in the body he provided hundred and twelve ways to attain ultimate nature.
So hundred-and-twelve-foot tall Adiyogi will come up.
I think we
These… These temples are not pure worshipping temples.
These are sadhana temples.
So if people come they can learn a three-minute yoga,
ten-minute yoga,
twenty-minute yoga,
thirty-minute yoga whatever.
If they come to the temple
there is a way to learn something for your inner well-being.
This is the fundamental shift that we want to bring about that is
for human well-being, instead of looking up you turn inward.
This shift needs to happen in the world (Applause).
As long as they are looking up, there’s going to be a fight on the planet.
My god versus your god,
struggle will never go.
Only if people start seeing
my well-being has to be addressed means I have to turn inward
if this awareness and this consciousness spreads,
only then you will see a different kind of humanity,
a different kind of world
where people will function in an entirely different way.
So we want to use this
event that’s coming up now on twenty-first of June which is declared the International Yoga Day
where hundred-and-seventy-seven nations have endorsed this for the first time.
In United Nations no resolution ever in the history of United Nations
got the support of one hundred-and-seventy-seven nations
International Yoga Day (Applause).
So International Yoga Day got this kind of support
and this has been
something that we’ve been working for that the leadership in the world
should begin to speak the spiritual possibility
and the benefits of turning inward.
And for the first time a head of a major nation is going out
in the committee of nations
in the United Nations our Prime Minister spoke about the importance and the significance of yoga.
When he is in conversation with the President of United States
seven minutes of the conversation was about yoga,
two minutes of the U.N. speech was about yoga.
Never before such things have happened.
what this means is the significance of life is shifting
from heaven to inner nature (Applause).
Those who think their well being is in heaven must proceed
My name is narendra singh. My question is how do i pass exam without studying?
Oh ...Narendra Singh how to pass exams without studying
My wish and my blessing is....
My wish and my blessing is you should not pass
because
when you say how to pass an examination without studying
What you're saying is?
how to get a certificate without knowing a damn thing about anything
so if you become a doctor
Without knowing what you should know you passed and became a doctor. We don't know how many lives you [will] take
Without studying or without knowing what you should know you became an [engineer]
You build the Kolkata bridge
Before anybody crosses on the bridge. It collapses on People's
heads taking lives
We don't know what other disasters you will cause
What has happened to you [is] just [this]?
You have empowered your ego and enhanced your desire
now what you need to do is this you [need] to empower your intelligence and
Enhance your competence
This is what you need to do. This is what education is about this is [what] life is about, but unfortunately [you] think
Education is about passing an examination
Education is not about passing an examination education is about learning. It looks like the world has forgotten about this
So those who want to pass examinations without studying?
Those who want to win without playing the game?
Those who want to be ha nerd for things that they have not done?
These people will achieve one thing they will die without living
This one thing they will achieve
because if you want to live
You must involve you must empower your intelligence and competence
In doing something to the best of your ability
There is fulfillment in this
There is joy [in] this there is life in this
in passing [an] examination without studying in winning a game without playing
in being honored without deserving
There is only
ego satisfaction
looking around at people who have failed and feeling little better than them as
I said for sure you will die without living
if you think
Passing an examination without studying is a success
Dying without living is definitely a super success
And you will succeed
Now what Mahendra singh Dhoni?
or Modi
Now this is champion of everything
One who wants to pass examination without studying is a champion of everything if you are a champion of everything you are a nutcase
If you are a champion in something this enormous striving in becoming a champion of something you're a champion of everything
Because you are a nutcase
And when you become a champion of everything
It means you don't know how to do anything. Yes, you don't know how to do anything
Not in the sink
It's my wish and my blessing
All those who don't study must fail
All those who do not know how to play must lose
Yes, all those who do not deserve [or] not. Ha nerd in this world
This is my wish
This is my blessing
So you just came to the wrong?
guy
There are people who will bless you?
Don't worry. Don't study my blessing. Is there you will pass I?
Am not one of that
You just came to the wrong place
What?
champion of everything
Hmm
If you become now that's good if you want to be champion of everything
Life will get you in so many different ways
If you fail, it's good at least [you] know you are not fit enough to take the next step yes or no
If you lose again, you know that you're not good [enough]
[yes], [or] no
That is the idea of failure that
[is] the idea of passing and failing?
That to know whether I am fit enough to take the next step or not
Not to fool the world
You can fool the world
But the problem is you will become such an expert and you'll make a fool of yourself
That's the biggest problem
So not in the thing
Not only not modi
There is enormous driving behind those names
Let's leave it here. Otherwise. I'll get more nasty
Because I don't like people who pass without studying
you
you
Questioner: Sadhguru I want to firstly thank you for being there in every aspect of my life,
from last few years.
Sadhguru, just I want to ask you is,
it’s about the direction.
Like...
The inner journey,
like whenever I’m taking the inner journey
I’m getting caught up with do...
the right thing, wrong thing,
the correct, the not correct,
the conduct...
I’m not clear,
I don’t understand, what is this inner journey?
How do we take it?
How do I take it?
How do I take this inner journey?
Sadhguru: Where do you want to go?
Questioner: I don’t know.
I want to go within me, Sadhguru.
I just don’t know, because
I once saw one of your videos,
you said that it’s the direction
which... should be set right first
and then the journey starts.
Sadhguru: Now, we should have this properly figured out because
Inner journey
if you have to make a journey,
you need distance, isn’t it?
Yes?
You understand what I’m saying?
If you have to make a journey you need distance.
Without distance, there is no journey.
How far away are you?
Hmm?
How far away are you?
I want to know.
Hmm?
So if there’s no distance,
how will you make a journey?
Somebody’s conning you.
Yes?
Somebody’s taking you for a ride. Isn’t it?
Because the fundamentals of making a journey is you need a distance.
No distance means,
how to make a journey?
So don’t try to do any inner journey.
But ‘I want to go inside,’
inside of what?
Who wants to go inside of what?
‘I want to go into myself,’
what is that?
Can anybody go into themselves?
I’m asking you.
If you’re this, you’re this. Isn’t it?
How can this go into this?
This can go into that,
that can go into this.
This cannot go into this. Isn’t it?
‘Oh Sadhguru, you’re just playing with the words,
but what about the inner journey?
There is no inner journey.
All the words that are used in language
can only describe the outer,
so the language is of the outer.
So whatever we speak is only around that,
never that.
We can speak around it,
nobody can speak it.
If anybody thinks,
‘This is it’
he needs treatment.
Doesn’t need a guru,
he needs a psychiatrist.
Yes?
Guru is for people who are normal,
but who wants to know something more.
If you’re abnormal,
you need a psychiatrist, not a guru.
Yes?
Treatment.
So don’t try to make any journey.
Just do one thing,
go home today,
don’t try to go anywhere,
no outer journey,
no inner journey,
just sit let me see.
If you can just sit for one moment,
you made it.
But the problem is if you sit here,
you want to gallop somewhere.
Just simply sit here;
in body not going anywhere,
in mind not going anywhere,
in emotion not going anywhere,
in your imagination, not going anywhere.
Don’t go anywhere.
Simply sit.
That’s it.
So
inner journey
no journey!
You are already here;
if you were not born,
then you had to make a journey to find you.
You are already here.
Are you here?
I want to know, are you here?
You’re already here, so what?
‘If it’s that simple,
why don’t I get it?’
Because you want a journey.
You think if you sit here,
your life will get wasted.
You have to go somewhere.
All the time, you have to go somewhere.
No!
Just sit here and see.
There’s a beautiful story. In Tamil Nadu,
during the British era,
this happened in 1920s or so,
and the British were ruling the place.
They had officers who were
titled as the Collectors.
You still have Collectors in Bengal?
Do you have Collectors?
They were called Collectors because their only fundamental duty,
fundamental and their only duty was to collect taxes.
Collect all the time, wherever they go.
So, there’s nothing much to collect in the villages
because people are barely scratching the bottom of their pot to eat.
So, in that also they collected.
Agriculture was heavily taxed, in South India,
I don’t know how it was in Bengal.
I think it was heavily taxed means
over fifty percent tax on agriculture
So, Collectors regularly visited temples,
not out of devotion
but to collect whatever came there
because big collections happened in the temples.
So every temple had to keep an account of their expenses.
So, in this particular temple,
the Collector came and he looked through the account books
and there,
thirty rupees
expense has been put for a month,
not for one day,
for one month.
‘Onnu pannatha swamikku sapadu’
that means
a man who doesn’t do anything ,
food for him,
thirty rupees per month.
The Collector looked at this and said,
‘Why are we feeding this man who doesn’t do anything?’
So,
they tried to explain, the trustees,
‘You know, this man is doing nothing
but not just nothing,
he’s doing nothing-nothing.’
‘No, no, no
In Her Majesty’s world,
if you want to earn a living,
you have to do something.
A man who does nothing, we cannot feed him.
Stop it!’
But the trustee said
‘No, no, no, no, not like that,
this man is, you know, really doing nothing, you know.’
‘Then definitely he must not be fed.
Call it off.
We cannot afford to spend thirty rupees on this man
who does nothing.’
Then there was a wise trustee,
he said,
‘You do one thing, you come here.
I will show you this man who does nothing.
You sit with him and do that nothing for some time,
you will understand.
So, they took the Collector
and made him sit down.
There was a man simply
simply sitting there.
The Collector came,
they said
‘You sit down, and just do nothing for five minutes.
Just see, what it is.’
So Collector,
‘What’s the big deal about that, I will also do nothing.’
He sat.
Two minutes he could not sit.
But this man simply sat.
Things happened to him like he had never imagined possible,
just sitting there.
He said,
‘This is not possible, just feed this damn man.’
So, doing nothing,
is not a simple thing.
It is the simplest thing.
Yes?
The simplest thing in the world is to do nothing, isn’t it?
But right now
you have invested so much in the reverse direction,
it’s picked up momentum.
Now, to reverse it and do nothing,
looks like an impossible thing.
So, you want to do inner journey also now.
Suppose there’s too much traffic there,
what will you do?
No, suppose there’s too much traffic
and it gets jammed, what do you do?
Tch, tch.
If you try to make a journey
there are problems of traffic, isn’t it?
All the other problems will come.
And if the light goes red what do you do?
So don’t make any journey.
Don’t complicate something that’s so simple.
Just understand, you’re a piece of life.
You are not a thought,
you are not a emotion.
You are not flesh,
you are not bone.
You are just life.
Constantly remind yourself,
that ‘I’m just life.
All these things happened to me,
body happened to me,
thoughts happened to me,
emotions happened to me,
marriage happened to me,
children happened to me,
but I’m just a piece of life.
Is it true?
Or am I psyching you up?
Hmm?
It’s true?
Please just live with the truth,
rest will happen.
Just live with the truth,
everything else will happen.
You’re just bloody lying to yourself all the time,
all kinds of things which are not true,
all the time. Please see.
In how many ways you’re lying to yourself.
Please look at it sincerely.
Just stop the nonsense.
It’s all here.
What is there?
It’s the simplest thing.
But you don’t want to be simple,
you’d like to be a little complicated, isn’t it?
Simplicity looks like stupidity,
but it is not so.
Everything that’s profound is simple.
Vinita Bali: One of the other things that you’ve talked about is, you know, the mind,
what… and these are my words what I’ve understood of what you’ve said, you know,
what the mind believes, the heart follows.
You know, what is in the mind is in the heart
Sadhguru: No, no.
Vinita Bali: …in a sense, if I’ve got it right, unless I’ve got it wrong.
And you know, because when you say that there is no difference between,
you know, my mind is saying this but my heart is saying is something else
Sadhguru: You’re talking about a metaphoric heart or your heart-heart?
Vinita Bali: I am talking about metaphoric
Sadhguru: Okay.
Vinita Bali: ...I’m not talking about
Sadhguru: Okay, not the pump?
Vinita Bali: I’m talking about metaphoric heart, not the heart that is, you know simply pumping.
There is something else, you know, which I’ve read some time back
which says that, you know, you’ve got to search in your heart with your intellect.
So, there are all these things which is about the mind and the heart and you know,
how you apply intelligence and perception to create awareness
and I think you’ve talked about that a little bit.
Would you elaborate for us, you know,
the concept of intellect, intelligence, perception and you know,
how we can use that in our everyday lives?
Sadhguru: See, there’s whole lot of enterprise going on in the world
by complicating very simple aspects of life,
really (Laughs).
If you complicate something with incomprehensible words
and if you have lot of words to do it, then you will seem profound
because anyway, nobody can understand what the hell it is (Laughter).
So, searching your heart with your intellect
the thing that you are referring to as your heart is generally the emotional side of you.
So, you’re separating what is thought and what is emotion.
Let me ask you a simple question.
If you look at yourself carefully in your day-to-day activity,
you will notice this
the way you think is the way you emote.
Right now, if I think you are such a wonderful person, I will have sweet emotions towards you.
Vinita Bali: Which I hope you are thinking (Laughter).
Sadhguru: This is not a confession (Laughter).
If I have… If I think, “She is horrible,”
I’ll have nasty emotions towards you.
I cannot think you are wonderful and have nasty emotions towards you.
I cannot think you are horrible and have sweet emotions towards you.
It is impractical and it’s not possible.
People act those things and it never works.
People – “I hate her but I’ll be nice to her”
they will go like this (Gestures) and do like this (Gestures) (Laughter), you know?
Have you seen this happening?
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Sadhguru: Nice things are done in a horrible way (Laughs).
It is happening in families,
among friends,
whatever -
nice things are done in such a horrible way.
If you want to do something horrible, just do something horrible at least.
Don’t spoil the nice things in a horrible way (Laughs).
So, now, the question is just this
thought and emotion, are they same or are they two different realms?
They are not.
Thought is agile.
See, today I can think
Right now, I think you are wonderful.
Just next moment, you did something I don’t like, I think you are horrible.
My thought immediately changes because it is agile
but my emotion is sappy, it’ll take three days, it’ll struggle and slowly turn around.
It has a larger turning arc but after three days, it’ll come my way.
For some people, it’s three days, some people, three months but they will turn around, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
The way you think is the way you feel, there is no other way.
It is also true, the way you feel is the way you think also.
It depends which is more dominant in you.
In a person, if emotion is forefront, the way they feel is the way they think.
If thought is forefront, the way they think is the way they feel.
You can’t think one way and feel another way,
that only happens temporarily for some time
but emotion will catch up.
Sadhguru: So coming to the doctor’s statement,
it all depends on how you take it.
Yes, it all depends on how you take it.
‘Should I fight it?’
How can you fight an enemy that you cannot see?
And cancer is not somebody.
You are the cancer.
A part of you has turned against yourself.
You can't fight it.
‘So what should I do?’
It is just that every human being
largely every human being
always in some way is working against himself or herself.
If you created
a moment of anger,
you are working against yourself, isn't it?
Today there is medical proof to show you
when you are angry,
your whole chemistry is working against yourself.
There is substantial medical proof.
It doesn’t need medical proof,
one should know by experience
but if you are so insensitive,
today we will show you blood results.
So if you are miserable,
you are working against yourself.
So in some way everybody has some kind of cancer.
Only when it manifests physiologically,
it becomes a medical issue;
till then it's your problem.
Yes?
Till then it's just your problem.
When it physiologically manifests,
it becomes a medical issue.
Now that it’s physiologically manifested
for variety of reasons,
not for one particular reason,
there are variety of reasons –
fighting is not the way.
Fighting the cancer not the way.
Fighting for something
and fighting against something
are two different things, isn't it?
And anyway it's best to take the fight out of it.
If you want
a plant to grow and blossom into beautiful fragrant flowers,
you may think you are fighting the earth
and getting flowers out of it
or
you may see it as a great love affair,
that your involvement with the earth
gives out such beauty and fragrance for you.
The second is a more intelligent way of doing it
because your experience of doing it will be pleasant;
the result, whatever it comes, will be pleasant.
It may flower or the cow may eat it up,
you don't know,
but whichever way,
if your experience of what you’re doing is very pleasant,
the result will become irrelevant to you.
‘So does it not matter whether I live or die?’
It matters,
that is why you must do it the way it works.
If it matters,
it's very important that you do it the way it works.
Just because you are a brave man
you will fight and you will die,
that’s no use
that’s of no use to anybody
and that’s not of no consequence to your life.
You did the right things,
maybe you had it your way
or maybe you did not have it your way
but at least you did the right things,
that is most important.
So when death stares at you,
it's a greatest possibility,
I think already we have handled that,
because it's reminding you that you’re mortal,
which is not a simple thing.
Most people have forgotten that they are mortal;
they think it only happens to somebody else.
Yes or no?
Most people think death happens only to somebody else,
not to them.
No, no, it's going to happen to you and me.
How it happens is different
but it's going to happen to you and me.
So about how to deal with the cancer,
I don’t want to go into that now.
If you come we can help you
but first go through the allopathic treatment.
It's a most aggressive and invasive treatment
but it's best to go through that
rather than taking chances.
But after that has happened,
recovering from the treatment is a big challenge.
There, there are many, many things that can do
in the yogic system it can be done
but cancer itself it can be done
but the risk levels are so high
and the time allowed is so little,
so we wouldn’t usually take a chance with that.
It's best to go through the treatment
and then do other things
so that recurrence doesn’t happen.
Questioner: Sadhguru, I read your quote on Manasarovar (Laughter).
That we have known only like a billionth of what is life
and different masters have written different things in their books,
so is there any end to this knowing? (Laughter)
Sadhguru: If the ignorance is boundless, the possibility of knowing is also boundless, isn’t it?
Hmm?
You want to reach a conclusion
because that is the way that right now mind is operating,
that it has to reach a conclusion.
No.
It is just that,
liberation means that you are on a endless possibility.
An endless possibility,
a pessimistic expression of that would be that you fall into a bottomless pit,
or you soar into a topless sky.
Which do you prefer?
It's just the same thing.
Depends whether you like comedies or tragedies (Laughter).
Accordingly we can say it’s… (Laughs)
So ‘Then, what's the point?
So I’m not ever going to get enlightened?’
No,
you have a wrong idea of enlightenment.
Unless you drop all your ideas about it,
yes for sure it's never going to happen,
because you’re assuming something about something that you do not know.
That’s a sure way to remain ignorant, isn’t it?
Yes?
You make an assumption about that which is not in your experience,
that’s a sure way to ensure your ignorance, isn’t it?
Don’t make assumption as to what it is.
‘Then what's the point of pursuing knowing. I will never know.’
That’s not how it is.
It's not any way you think it is.
It is another way, in a way that you cannot think.
It's only because of that it seems to be difficult.
Why constant stress on devotion, devotion, devotion is simply because of that,
because you can't think it out,
you’re never going to think it out.
You just have to walk into it,
and a thinking person will not walk into anything
because he is hesitation and hesitation and hesitation.
So we are just cultivating you in such a way that there’ll be no hesitation in you,
you can just walk.
It's easy to walk on familiar terrain.
A completely new terrain - people cannot walk, isn’t it?
Enlightenment means you’re constantly seeking new terrain,
where you don’t know how to walk.
You don’t want to walk on terrain that you already know how to walk,
you want to walk on a terrain that you do not know how to walk.
That’s adventure, isn’t it?
And that’s spiritual process and that’s enlightenment.
So this is the nature of a [human] being
whatever you are deprived of
You think that is the highest thing?
Whatever, you don't have looks like at that [moment]. That is the highest thing
if you are not [eating] for two days
Food will be [God] yes. [oh], no. Yes
If you don't understand this close your mouth hold your nose like this for two minutes
Will you ask for air of God?
God comes and says you want me or air you'll say hell with you. I want to breathe
Because whatever at that moment. You're deprived of that becomes takes honor
and
Larges itself in such a way blocks everything out or in other words
when you're in any state of compulsiveness
You don't see anything the way it is it gets exaggerated
If your bladder is full
One minute I am talking about [enlightenment]
your bladder is very [4i]
interested
I
Don't want any enlightenment right now going to the bathroom feels like ultimate liberation
Yes, or no
Just about anything
When you're in a state of compulsiveness, you don't see anything the way it is
You will life will get distorted to make you think that that is it at that moment?
So like this human life passes from one come on compulsive state to another
Never allowing yourself
that
Little bit of space where you could see things the way, they are
If you do not even see life the way it is can you handle it the way? It needs to be handled
It doesn't arise isn't it?
If you don't see things the [way] they are [you] can never handle it the way. It needs to be handled
Because of this in many ways individual human lives and all societies
Have become distorted humanity
When I say distorted it's normal I mean normal
I
was talking to a
like Fourteen fifteen-Year-old kids in a school
and
I
I was I couldn't believe that I was talking to about Eleven twelve of them
Young boys and girls
And something came up, and I was just asking them
What are they going to do next because they were in their 10th standard or something?
They're only talking about
finding a job and
earning a living [I]
I couldn't believe this because my whole life I never thought of earning a living
my dear father
[used] to
Break his head this boy has no fear in his heart. What will happen to him? What will happen to him I?
Said not having Fear is a problem. I thought fear is a problem
I never thought not having Fear is a problem
so
according to
The dictates of the divine [I] was supposed to become a doctor because my father is a doctor
At the age of 10, I told him no that's one thing I'm not going to be I'm not going to be rocked
But every day somebody is trying to work on me. You must become a doctor you must become a doctor no Indian family
[you] must become a doctor if you cannot of course now. They were all said to to software I
was I
was A
I was in Chicago this too. You know a did this two days ago
[I] came to India so one week ago eight days ago. I was in Chicago and
An Indian person came and asked okay, what are you doing?
[what] else across?
That means he's a software engineer
There was a time if you said what else you were a doctor now if you say, what else it means you're a software engineer
It is not because [they] [are]
Normally interested in human physiology they became doctors
Not because they have have an electronic this
Thing they became a software engineer just to earn a living
Is it not important [I]?
Am not saying it's not important all I am saying is
Even an ant which is one millionth of your brain
Is capable of earning a living? What's your problem with such a big brain
Why I'm saying this is
this idea
this
Horribly limiting idea has been imposed into our youths that you must earn a living and that's the biggest thing
this big brain
Earning a living is actually a problem on this planet
Do I know [everybody's] been conditioned to believe that it is not so I'm telling you
it is not so
earning a living is a petty thing for human consciousness, but
Unfortunately all humanity is investing all its energies and intelligence in just earning a living
if this one thing does not change in the world
That I am not saying one should not all I am saying is
It need not occupy the entirety of human consciousness to earn a living
If you put one little finger to work, it'll earn a living
It's capable. This is capable of that
All human genius has been smothered to death
Simply [because] everybody is thinking how to earn a living how to earn a living you know
The moment they can earn a living they will sit [down] and become fat
You must be seeing what can I do with this life isn't it?
Yes
You must be seeing what is the greatest thing I can do with this life
Because one day will fold it. Do you know?
Do you know [you'll] [fall] [dead] one day?
So before you die. Whatever is the peak possibility for this life should happen isn't it [I]?
Earned my living I earn my living. This is [a] big pride
Why don't you see every insect every worm every bird every animal every?
Creature in this planet is earning a living. What is such a
What he said, what is there to be so proud of about I on my own living
[everybody's] earning their own living isn't it only human beings are making a big issue out of it
two big issue
When I look at it
How human intelligence has been sacrified at the altar of earning a living is?
Unbelievable, how [many] things human beings could have done how many incredible things they could have done but instead of that they're earning a living
So it's very very important. I'm I'm just thinking we should
Start a wave
Particularly in schools and colleges that earning a living is not
He's a damn little thing
It is not the prime of your life
With one little finger you can earn a living with this big brain
When I ant can earn its living this big brain should it struggle to earn a living
That is become a problem because you want to be like somebody else
Isn't it?
You want to be like somebody else?
that ends lecture and
Once you are into this checker
Nothing else is possible it. [just] keeps you going and going and going in leslie
now this possibility of
This simple thing called yoga
Is not about twisting your body is not about
Getting fit. It's not about getting healthy
This all these things nature will do for you. If only if you live in tune with it
This is about understanding
the Geometry of the cosmos
Through the Geometry of your own system. I am calling this geometry because
Cosmos is a geometry isn't
Planet Earth is going around the sun. What is it a diesel-powered?
You took a big diesel engine is pushing it if it was the roar of the engine would have killed us
Just the perfection of Geometry just keeps going and going and going isn't it?
using those perpetual machines
Have you seen those little ones if you just do it like this for years on end?
It's going so this is just that it's a perfection of Geometry which keeps it going and going and going
The whole universe is geometrically perfect. That's why it stays there otherwise it wouldn't
and
if you learn to
Hold your body in a certain way if the geometry of [your] body is in alignment
with the Geometry of the
rest of the creation
Suddenly you will find
That is a rapper a rapper
Which will allow you you can download the whole cosmos into this one
This is not a tiny little if you simply like this if you live, you're just a piece of flesh and ball
If you just get it, right
Suddenly this is something else
Probably these days you don't have this experience anymore
because you got all tata sky dish net and all that stuff, but if suppose you had a
Television in your home in 80's when first the door version came
You are watching your favorite cricket match
Suddenly your television was [boo-boo-boo]
Then you climb up the terrace and there it is [an] [aluminum] contraption
if you do like this nothing will come if you do like this nothing will come you just get it to the right place ah
The world pours into your sitting room
This is just like that if you learn to just hold it, right
The whole Cosmos will pour into you
so
this is
engineering yourself
Does not mean engineering yourself
To breathe little better to be little more healthy no
This is about realizing the full potential of what it means to be human
you
Sadhguru: The word samsara does not mean family.
This… it just means cyclical.
Who you are right now is a product of certain cycles.
There’re many ways to look at this.
The cycles of the sun,
the cycles of the moon
and various other cycles in the universe
we are a product of that.
Only because our mothers’ bodies were in sync with the cycles of the moon,
we’re born here, isn't it?
So we are a product of cycles.
Our idea of time is cyclical.
If the planet spins once, we say it's a day.
If the moon goes around, we say it's a month.
If the planet goes around the sun, we say it's a year.
Our idea of time itself is cyclical.
If it was all like this …going like this,
you wouldn’t know what is time,
because there are no markers anywhere.
If the planet was just going straight somewhere,
would you know what is time?
Only because it's in cycles,
you are able to decipher as to what is time.
You are able to measure a certain length of time.
And your life is a certain amount of time
and it is going in cycles
because it's a product of this.
Solar system is like the Potter’s Wheel
we’ve just generated this.
So, time and the cycles of time,
either you can be trapped in the cycles of time
or you can ride the cycles of time.
If you are trapped in the cycles of time,
we say
“You are in samsara”
because life becomes cyclical
and it keeps repeating
psychologically,
physiologically.
Physiologically definitely there are cycles.
The monthly cycles in a woman’s body are related to the moon.
There are other cycles which are related to the sun,
which are not so obvious as the cycles of the moon,
but they are happening.
If you observe your life carefully,
you will see it is cyclical.
Same things are repeating themselves -
in different colors,
but same things are repeating themselves over a period of time.
You can actually look whether it is twelve years,
it's six years,
it's three years,
it's happening at some point.
If it is happening in very short cycles,
you are heading towards a psychological breakdown.
If it's happening in long enough cycles,
you are just suffering boredom.
So, if you’re trapped in the cycles,
we call it samsara.
If you ride the cycles towards your liberation,
then we say this is sanyas.
Sanyas need not necessarily mean
not having a family.
Samsara need not necessarily mean that you have a family.
You can be a sanyasi
and still be in a samsara of your own.
You need not be married,
by yourself you could be wrangled up by yourself.
If you get married, you
extra help you get.
People are alone
and they’re quite wrapped up by themselves.
They don’t need anybody’s help.
They’re doing fine by themselves
their own samsara.
Is it happening or no?
Single people are in their own samsara or no?
They are into their own chakkar going on.
When you get married,
at least you can blame it on somebody
“It's because of her, I am like this”
or “Because of him, I am like this.”
So these words have gotten related to certain aspects of life because
generally it's believed that you can be trapped in samsara
only when you have a family.
Because once you have a family,
you have to earn certain amount of money,
you have to do certain things,
children are there means certain things have to be managed.
So things become cyclical.
When things are going in cycles,
it feels that everything is better organized.
If it was not going in cycles,
every day is a new day -
with children around you,
every day new day you can't deal with it.
It's better it's happening in some system.
So you will aspire for a cycle.
You will not want new things to be happening every day.
You want some order,
you want some expected things to happen.
Surprises look like disasters.
This happened one day.
Shankaran Pillai was going home
and suddenly he thought
he’s done nothing for his wife in the last few years.
So, he bought a huge bunch of red roses
and went home
and knocked at the door.
And when she opened the door,
with a big grin on his face,
he tried to give the roses to her.
She just blew up.
She just blew away and she said,
“You fool, you know
since morning the tap has been leaking,
the dog has been sick,
and the childrens have… children had a food fight,
I’ve been cleaning the whole place
and now you have the courage to get drunk
and come home.”
So surprises can be disastrous
because
you aspire for order more than excitement.
Once the number of balls that you are juggling are too many,
you aspire for order,
you don’t care for excitement anymore.
Yes or no?
If you had five children at home
instead of one or two,
then you would aspire for everything to work like clockwork
You don’t want one extra thing to happen.
You don’t want anything new to happen in your house.
So this is samsara.
You want to go in cycles.
You’re aspiring to be in cycles
because cyclical
at least there is a comfort,
you know what's coming next.
So, once you go in cycles,
cycle means a circle.
If I say you’re going in circles,
it simply means that you are not getting anywhere.
So in the cycles of time
if you’re trapped in the cycles of time,
you are not getting anywhere,
but going through the same thing
because you have poor memory,
that’s the only safety.
Because you have poor memory,
you do not realize the same things are being repeated.
Suppose your memory opened up to many lifetimes
and you realize you’ve been doing the same stupid things
over and over again,
you got excited about the same little things again and again,
you would feel utterly silly, isn't it?
within the cycle, that cycle means so much to you,
it looks like it's everything.
If you break that cycle and
something beyond the cycle becomes apparent to you,
suddenly what’s within the cycle is so limited
and so meaningless.
The relationships,
the activity,
the thoughts,
the emotions,
everything that you held as everything in your life,
suddenly phoof.
So, this is sanyas
that is you’ve broken the cycles of time.
You’re riding the cycles of time -
you are not trapped in the cycles of time.
So, can I do this within the family?
You can,
but nobody need to know.
If they know
they can't… they won't be able to live with you
unless they are also like that.
People are looking for some
some bondage
People don’t come together seeking freedom.
They’re coming together seeking bondage, isn't it?
If they know that you are not bound by anything,
it’ll be dangerous to live with a person like that.
So
once you have broken the cycles of time,
consciously you can be part of it when you want to be,
but when you are not… when you… you are not.
So, being a sanyasi inside a family situation
it is not that it’s not possible;
this is not being uncaring,
this is not being unconcerned -
this is just being free from a certain situation.
There’re many people who live in the family
and they don’t care a damn.
That’s different.
That is because they are in their own samsara.
They are not involved with the other samsara.
They are in a smaller cycle of their own.
Being absolutely involved
and not being entangled
that is the way to freedom,
that is the way to liberation.
If you are not involved,
you may be just uncaring.
You will be in your own small chakkar of your own.
You will see people
who seem to be not involved in anything around them.
Little, little things about themselves are very important for them.
If you disturb that, they’ll go crazy.
Yes?
Have you seen this?
They don’t care if…of whatever the family,
but their coffee must be right.
If Ccoffee doesn’t come, they’ll go crazy.
So they’ll have smaller cycles.
So, being a sanyasi within a family situation not it is
not that it’s not possible,
it's a bigger challenge.
If you’re a sanyasi by yourself,
nobody around you,
it's a lesser challenge
because you don’t have to carry anything with you.
When Gautama the Buddha was asked
“Is it good to walk in company or alone?”
He is a very brutal man
he said,
“It's better to walk alone than to walk with a fool.”
He is saying
‘who else will marry you?’
You are not getting me.
Who else will marry?
Unless he is a fool,
why will he be with you?
‘Better to walk alone than to walk with a fool.’
It's a loaded statement.
Virender Schwag: Namaskaram Sadhguru
It is wonderful to interact with you on Guru Pournima.
So many people are interacting with you
and thanks for giving me an opportunity to ask a question –
why don’t people just share their knowledge with others just as the way you are sharing with your followers?
Sadhguru: This is the age of intellectual property (Laughter/Applause).
Somebody even wants to patent yogasanas.
You can patent the asana but still you can’t get into it (Laughter).
You may have patented all the difficult asanas
but can you get into it - that’s the question.
So, we have come to a place in the world,
where everything is monetized.
Everything has a commercial angle to it.
So, because of that,
as people have been miserly with money,
now they are miserly with knowledge,
because you know, knowledge is money.
So they are miserly with that
because it’s money in some way.
So, this monetizing of everything
can really destroy many things in this world.
In this culture,
we always fixed it like this
spiritual process,
health-related things
and education,
these three things should never be commercialized.
Everything else can be commercialized.
These three things should always be offered (Applause).
The question is only about the qualification of the recipient.
All kinds of people come and say,
“I want to go, I want to do this, I want to do that.”
Two days later, they won't be here.
So, the question is only about the qualifications of the recipient.
If that one thing is ensured,
knowledge should be offered irrespective of
commercial interests that are involved in it.
But today, everything is commercialized
and in many ways, you can’t help it
because the whole momentum is in that direction.
Virender may be willing to share his knowledge.
He may teach ten different people how to hold the bat,
how to hit the ball,
how to stand, how to do this, how to do that.
But how many will go about scoring double centuries after double centuries (Laughs) (Applause)
because to get a qualified recipient is not easy.
It’s not easy.
Knowledge may be there.
When it comes to experiential knowing,
how many people are willing to receive it?
Everybody says,
“Yes!”
I every day meet people –
“All the way, Sadhguru, I want to go all the way” (Laughter).
Tomorrow morning,
they are crying because somebody said something.
They want to leave.
Day after tomorrow morning,
their uncle’s daughter’s birthday they want to go (Laughter).
I am not saying there’s anything wrong with your uncle’s daughter (Laughs).
All I am saying is your interests are many.
That means you are not going anywhere.
You can dabble with many
but there must be one direction to life,
otherwise you are not going far,
you’re going to wander around here.
If you want to go, penetrate through something
and go a distance,
you need some one-pointedness.
People come here, they say,
“Sadhguru, you give me any kind of sadhana.
I am willing to die, Sadhguru” (Laughs).
I say, “Don’t die, hold it (Laughter).
I am willing to offer anything, but hold it,
we will see, we will go step by step.”
Three days later, they come and say
“Sadhguru, you know Sadhguru,
I have… I have found somebody Sadhguru,
I think for lifetimes this person must have been waiting for me.
I saw this girl and phoo” (Laughter/Applause).
Now
Now there is a spiritual angle to it.
“It looks like for lifetimes we have known each other” (Laughter/Applause).
If you have known somebody for lifetimes
and you didn’t make it,
it’s best you keep away from them (Laughter/Applause)
because for most people,
their direction of life keeps changing every other day.
It’s hard to offer anything,
it’s all bits and pieces.
Of course, there are also people who think...
See knowledge is not something that you own
because knowledge is not about you,
knowledge is about the creation,
about the nature of the creation.
What is already there is what you have absorbed.
You didn’t invent it,
you didn’t come up with it,
you only saw it.
This is why the language in this country is very clear.
When it comes to any kind of spiritual dimension,
we are only talking about realization.
Realizing means something that was always there,
always right here,
but you were so stupid you didn’t see it,
today you saw it.
I realized. I did not attain,
I did not arise,
I did not climb somewhere,
I just realized.
But the thing was always here.
So, what is here all the time as truth
cannot belong to somebody.
Nobody can stop you from it
but those who have access
if they have truly accessed
they will never block you,
they will never hold back.
Only those who have accumulated from books and stuff,
they will hold back
because any accumulated stuff is limited
and it will get over.
If you give away everything,
it will get over tomorrow morning,
you won’t know what to do.
So, you will hold it and be miserly
because you have gathered it.
What is gathered you can hold back,
what you have realized you cannot hold back
because it’s an endless run.
You only constantly wishing there is somebody here,
who can soak it up as fast as you can give it.
That is the problem.
The problem is of lack of receptivity,
not of holding back (Laughs) –
if you really know.
But if you have acquired knowledge you will be miserly
because you can only acquire that much,
you don’t want it… it to get over.
Knowledge is like money again (Laughs),
it can get over (Applause).
Sadhguru: Good afternoon everybody.
So the first question would naturally be
what is that prayer about?
It's not a prayer,
it's an invocation.
An invocation means –
there is a whole technology
as to how to organize your system to do a particular action.
As human beings,
we do so many things in our lives.
If you want to run a race,
your body,
your brain,
your energy needs to be in a certain way.
You want to meet a friend,
it needs to be in another way.
You want to do something else
which needs your intellect on,
it needs to be in another way.
Like this,
for different types of activities that we perform in our life,
we need to have our system in a certain way.
Lot of people are managing to make it happen
naturally or the situation will slowly set them in.
People will enter a situation unprepared;
gradually the situation will mold their mind,
their energies and everything to function well there.
But there is a way that you can consciously create an inner situation
where you craft that situation within yourself
so that you are organized in every way;
all the faculties within you
your body, your mind, your emotion and your energy
is properly organized for that specific activity.
There is a whole science and technology
as to how to go about this in an organization within a human being.
When we say a leader
or when we say ambition,
ambition is just an exaggeration of the existing.
When we say vision,
as the word suggests,
it is about a new possibility,
something which is not yet.
Ambition is about wanting to take as much as we can take,
vision is about making everything yours.
One is an aggressive way of taking it,
another is an embrace.
It is like the distinction between
love and rape.
Both seem the same for external viewers
but it's a world of difference;
making the world yield to you willingly
and trying to take a piece of the world
are two different dimensions of life.
As human beings,
like never before we are empowered.
Individual human beings,
we have become so powerful
because of technological advancement.
What ten thousand men could do thousand years ago,
today one man can do.
When we are so hugely empowered,
it's extremely important
that the way we exist here is in a more inclusive way.
All this philosophy,
is it possible for a businessman?
It is very much possible
and especially not possible;
it is very much needed for the businessman
because business is about expansion.
Does expansion happen because of inclusiveness
or does expansion happen because you forcefully take something?
If you forcefully take something,
you will never expand to the full capacity.
Only if you learn how to make the world yield
to what you want it to be,
only then you can take it all.
Ambition is about more,
vision is about all.
When we say leadership,
a leader is somebody who is trying to create a situation
and people are looking up to him,
believing that he is going to make it happen.
So that means he must be in some position within himself
that he is able to see things better than the people around him.
Business leadership or managing large situations,
if you want to manage one thousand people,
essentially you are managing one thousand minds.
If you want to manage one thousand minds,
if you are not even able to manage your own mind,
it is going to be accidental management.
And because of this accidental management
you will see,
managers of the world are the most tense looking human beings.
We are sending a completely wrong message to the world.
‘If you succeed you will suffer’
this is the message that’s going to the world.
It happened in ‘60s in America,
because all the successful people are so miserable,
the youth did not see that success is worthwhile.
They thought
‘Just sitting on a street corner and smoking pot is much better.
At least we are happy.’
So this is a very wrong message that
‘Success is a bad thing,’
is a horrible message for humanity and the future generations to come.
Right now, this message is going out because you will see,
successful people are look… have the most miserable faces in the planet.
Success is
should be a sweet thing
but success has become a suffering
simply because we are managing to do outside things
without doing anything about ourselves.
If the work that you are doing is important,
the first thing that you need to do is work upon yourself.
What does working upon yourself mean?
See, as you sit here,
each human being is his own,
simply because of the accumulation of experiences that have happened in different people
and how all this is assimilated within each person,
each human being is his own
and that’s the beauty of human beings,
you can't find a carbon copy anywhere,
everybody is unique.
This uniqueness will be a wonderful thing
if it functions cohesively;
this same uniqueness
if it does not function cohesively,
this uniqueness has to be called
‘You are really unique’ means... that means you are a fake.
Only if this uniqueness functions cohesively,
this uniqueness can be celebrated and enjoyed,
and the world can benefit from this
and the individual can benefit from this.
Our idea of success has become like this right now,
that we are sitting… You know,
there is a proverbial story in India
about a man sitting on a tree branch
and cutting it but sitting on the wrong end of it.
If he succeeds he will fail.
Right now, we have brought the world to such a situation
that if we succeed we will fail.
In 2008 when I was …at the World Economic Forum,
the recession was just beginning
and I saw all these two thousand and odd people who are hugely successful people
carrying very long faces –‘
Recession is coming,
recession is coming.’
So they asked me to handle a session called
‘Recession and Depression.’
I said recession is bad enough,
you don’t have to get depressed on top of it.
And the way we have created this whole situation is such
if we....
if we fail we will be depressed,
if we succeed we will be damned.
That’s how we have created the situation.
If all the seven billion people on this planet
use modern technology and get super busy,
I think the planet just has ten, fifteen years left.
Fortunately fifty percent of the people are lazy,
really.
Now it's not human intelligence which is saving the planet,
it is not human love or compassion saving the planet,
it is human lethargy which is saving the planet.
That’s a shame, isn't it?
Simply because our ideas of success,
our ideas of well-being itself has not been consciously worked at,
it's just like we have just grown like wilderness.
Now today, leadership means
that we are able to re-engineer
our very idea of success, well-being in the world.
If we don’t do this now,
the success will be a bad thing.
All the younger generations are becoming activists
who are against any kind of successful activity in the planet.
I was
I happened to be in a conference in London,
a major conference.
Almost three thousand people participating, all kinds of people
and this is about,
‘Be the Change.’
And here all kinds of things were going on;
I was listening with great apprehension
for what things that are being said.
One man has come from India;
he’s brought ten tribals from India carrying one-one bag of tea.
He said,
‘See, I have brought the producer himself to UK
and they are going to sell the tea bags right here
and they are going to take the money,
nobody in between,
no corporations,
nothing,
no cash,
direct.’
I said… when my turn to speak came I said,
‘It's okay I don’t mind buying the tribal tea,
but I fly Lufthansa,
I don’t want to fly a tribal airline
where two out of the four engines are working.’
The idea of creating corporations and businesses was
to make our life more efficient,
not monstrous.
It will become monstrous
if we function out of individual ambition
rather than a larger vision.
‘Somehow get there’
this was the way of the ambition.
‘Somehow get there’ will work only short time.
Can I tell you a story?
Can I tell you a story?
I seek your permission because
it is probably just post lunch for many of you
and the moment I say,
‘Once upon a time,
lot of people think it's bedtime
it’s not.’
On a certain day,
a bull and a pheasant were grazing upon the field.
The bull eating the grass,
the pheasant picking ticks off the bull
partnership business.
There was a huge tree at the edge of the field.
The pheasant nostalgically looked at the tree and said,
‘Oh alas!
There was a time I could fly to the topmost branch of the tree
but now I don’t have enough strength in my wing even to fly to the first branch of the tree.’
The bull very nonchalantly said,
‘That’s no issue.
Eat a little bit of my dung every day,
within a fortnight you will reach the top of the tree.’
The pheasant said,
‘Come on,
what kind of nonsense is that?’
The bull said,
‘Really, try and see.
The whole humanity is on it.’
The pheasant hesitantly started pecking at the dung and lo,
on the very first day it reached the first branch of the tree.
Within a fortnight
it did reach the topmost branch of the tree.
It sat on the topmost branch of the tree,
beginning to enjoy the scenery.
An old farmer who was rocking on the rocking chair
saw a fat old pheasant sitting on top of the tree,
pulled out his shotgun
and shot the bird off the tree.
The moral of the story is,
‘Many times bullshit can get you to the top,
but it’ll never let you stay there.’
If… if an external observer looks at our world,
the human activity
over a span of a few hundred years
and looks at what we have done with ourselves,
this will be our story.
We just somehow made it and then collapsed.
This is
It is no more about ‘somehow making it’;
we are right now allowing
social and other environments to shape human consciousness.
No,
human consciousness should shape our business environment,
the social environment
and the world’s environment
instead of allowing the human consciousness to do the other.
Right now, we are allowing the circumstances
to change the human consciousness.
The essence of being human is
every other animal adapts to its situation;
we can create our situations,
this is the fundamental of being human,
otherwise we are no different from any other creature on this planet.
Everybody else is capable of adapting;
we are capable of crafting the situations that we want.
Now leadership means just this,
that we have a vision to craft the situation
where everybody can fit in
and everybody can prosper
and our ideas of prosperity has to change
because right now
if we have to provide what an average American citizen has,
to seven billion people,
the Living Earth statistics says that
we need four and a half planets.
We just have one
and there is another one eight million light years away.
If you are up for the travel,
there is just one more
another two and a half we need to find somewhere.
So our success itself is working against us,
this is not a good thing.
If we do well, we will do badly.
This is not a good way to craft our situations
because our idea of doing well is just being little better than yesterday.
Just being little better than yesterday is not doing well.
This happened in 1910.
There was a man in India,
his name was Topiwala.
Topiwala means a hat seller.
You have this culture here also,
that somebody’s second name happens to be his profession –
Carpenter,
Goldsmith,
Blacksmith,
whatever;
like that he is a hat seller,
he is a Topiwala.
He has gone from village to village in tropical heat, selling hats.
One afternoon he is tired, sat under a tree,
opened his meager lunch, ate and dozed off.
When he opened his eyes, he looked,
all the hats were gone.
He looked all over the place, no hats,
they’re just gone, disappeared.
If you do everything that you can do
and it doesn’t work, what do you do?
Usually look up in prayer.
So he looked up.
There he saw a bunch of monkeys,
all sitting with hats on.
He screamed at them,
they screamed back at him.
He abused them,
they abused in their own language.
He picked up whatever he could and threw it at them;
they picked up whatever they could and threw it back at him.
Not knowing what to do,
frustrated,
he took his hat and flung it on the ground.
All the monkeys took their hats and flung it on the ground.
He picked up his hats and went about his business.
Two thousand and twelve, 23rd of September,
another Topiwala going from village to village,
selling hats.
He came in the afternoon, sat under a tree,
opened his elaborate lunch (21st century),
had his lunch, promptly fell asleep.
When he opened his eyes, hats were gone.
He didn’t look here and there,
he looked straight up.
The monkeys were sitting with hats on.
He got up and jived,
they all jived.
He made funny faces,
they made funnier faces.
He had all the fun he wanted to have.
When he was done,
he took his hat and flung it on the ground.
One baboon of a monkey quickly came down the tree,
picked up the hat
walked up to him,
gave him a tight slap in the face and told him,
‘You idiot you think only you had a grandfather?’
So, just one step ahead of yesterday is not leadership.
Leadership has to craft
Today we have come to a place
where the economic leadership has
moving into a certain position.
In the sense
about three hundred years ago,
largely religious leadership was controlling the world.
From mindlessness of religious leadership
we moved into the tyranny of the military leadership.
From the tyranny of the military leadership,
we moved into the confusion of democratic leadership,
confusion and incompetence of democratic leadership in many ways,
because hundred people are running to… trying to run the place.
In India, it's five hundred and forty two people trying to run the nation.
By the time you make these five hundred and forty two people understand
what is needed and what should be done tomorrow morning,
it will take five years
and they are not there by then.
So, today, we are moving into a place
where in the next ten, fifteen years’ time
the economic leadership will be the most important leadership in the world.
We are definitely going there.
The good thing about the business leader is,
he has no qualms about anything
if there is a good deal he will make a deal with the devil.
He has no prejudices about anybody.
You are a white,
you are black,
you are yellow,
you are this,
you are that -
he has no issues,
he will make a deal with the devil if the deal is good.
So the economic leadership is in many ways,
in the very nature of things it is very flexible leadership.
If we train this leadership
if we bring about
now an institution like this and many others,
if we bring about the necessary shift
from economic leaders operating out of narrow personal ambitions
to a larger vision,
that will be the greatest thing for the future generations of the world
where a clear message that
‘Success is the sweetest thing in your life,
success is not a miserable thing,’
this message has to go.
If this message has to go,
economic leaders need to do something about themselves;
they are doing a lot about many things,
they need to do something about themselves.
When I say, ‘Doing something about yourself-
why is it important?
Do you see me?
Are we on talking terms or is there a issue?
Are we in talking terms?
Do you see me?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Use your hands and point out where I am.
Ah, you got me wrong.
You know I am a mystic from India?
No,
this light is falling upon me, reflecting,
inverted image is going through your lenses,
inverted image in the retina,
don’t you know the whole story?
Where do you see me right now?
Within yourself, isn't it?
Where do you hear me right now?
Within yourself.
Where have you seen the whole world?
Within yourself.
Everything that you have ever known and experienced
is only happening within you.
Right now if somebody next to you touches you,
you think you are feeling their hand
but that is not the reality.
The reality is
you are experiencing the sensations within your own hand.
You cannot feel the other hand.
You are completely incapable of experiencing anything of the outside.
The way it is projected within you
that is the only way you will experience it.
That is why, what is light for you is darkness for some other creature.
Suppose you and an owl sit together –
you have owls in Switzerland?
If you and an owl sit together
and start an argument as to which is light and darkness,
where will you go?
Hmm?
Endless argument, isn't it?
Who is right, you or the owl?
You or the owl,
who is right as to which is light and which is darkness?
Hmm?
Participant: Both.
Sadhguru: Both? If you are saying both,
either you are in the Diplomatic Corps
or you have a successful marriage.
These are two areas where you should learn to say ‘Both, both, both.’
Now I am asking you which is light?
What you see is light or what the owl sees is light,
which is the real light?
You don't know.
The thing is, your sense organs have opened up as it is necessary for your survival,
it has opened up
as it is necessary for his survival.
You really don't know what is what.
You only know the world the way it is projected within you.
So, working upon the inward nature of who you are,
is the most essential thing.
If you are in any position of responsibility and power
it’s extremely important you do something about this
otherwise it will give you completely wrong images which look right.
I want you to look back on the history of this world –
how many horrible things human beings have done to each other
believing they were doing the right thing.
Yes or no?
No?
At that time,
when they did these horrible things
they really believed they were doing the right thing.
They did not think they were doing the wrong thing.
This happens because we have done nothing about the interiority.
When I say interiority
what did you have for breakfast?
What did you have for breakfast?
Participant: Egg.
Sadhguru: Egg, chicken.
So he had an egg for breakfast,
but over the morning this egg has transformed itself into a human being, isn't it?
It goes into you and it's becoming a human body. Isn't it so?
Yes?
If you eat a piece of bread,
you eat a banana
what you call as your body is just accumulation of the food that you’ve eaten.
Isn't it so?
Now what a phenomena he is!
He can make a chicken egg into a human being over the morning.
If you ask Charles Darwin, this would take millions of years.
He can do it over the morning
and every one of you can do it over the morning.
So here
there is an intelligence here,
there is a competence here
which is capable of transforming a piece of bread or a egg or a banana
or whatever into a human body.
When I say human body,
I am not talking about you, me, like this
this is the most sophisticated machine on the planet.
Yes or no?
This is the highest level of technology.
Isn't it so, human body?
Every other gadget that you see on the planet has come out of this.
This is the gadget.
This the gadget
Yes,
you are too involved in the iPhone,
you never looked at the ‘I’.
This super gadget,
with what kind of raw material are you manufacturing?
With a chicken egg,
with a banana,
with a piece of bread.
So there is an intelligence here,
there is a competence here which is of that level.
If only if you found access to this intelligence,
even if a drop of this intelligence entered your daily life,
you would live magically.
People around you will think you are super human.
There is no such thing as super human.
People talk about being super human,
simply because they have not realized that
‘Being human’ is super.
Being human is super
because see, he can make a egg into a human being
a chicken egg.
Is it not super?
Is it super human or super?
It's just super, isn't it,
that you can make a chicken egg into a human being over the morning.
If your digestion is good, in three hours,
otherwise four hours.
If you have a weak stomach four hours, otherwise three hours.
Fantastic, isn't it?
Does this intelligence exist in everybody?
We have mistaken that intelligence means thought
no.
The intelligence in the body is so phenomenal.
That which is the very source of making this body happen
is right now functioning within you
and there is a way to find access to this.
This is what we are offering as Inner Engineering process
and this inner dimension is needed,
the moment you are taking a position of leadership in the world
in whatever capacity.
It is your fundamental business to see that
first this one is fixed
because once you are a leader,
every thought that you generate,
every emotion that you generate,
every action that you perform
is going to impact millions of people.
Once you have such a privilege in the world,
I think leaders have this business
that they have to do something about themselves
that the way they think,
the way they emote,
the way they act is not destroying the world in so many different ways.
May be good intentions;
good intentions alone will not produce results.
It is the right kind of action
with the right kind of consciousness
that produces the necessary results.
We are going with ambition right now;
we think that’s the only driving force.
There is a
There is a beautiful story in the India lore.
A monkey goes into a house and it finds a jar full of nuts.
So he puts his hand inside.
It's a very narrow necked bottle or a jar –
puts inside, handful of nuts,
want to take it out. It won't come,
it's stuck.
It has to let go some, but it's ambitious.
It cannot let go even one nut.
Pulls and pulls it doesn’t come.
Then another wise monkey comes –
some monkeys are wise, you know.
Another wise monkey comes and says
‘This is not the way,
you leave it’ and together
they overturned the jar and all the nuts are out.
Now we have to move from ‘more’ to ‘all’.
If you journey from ‘more’ to ‘all’,
that means you have travelled from ambition to vision.
If you have questions,
any kind of questions.
Any kind of questions.
Questioner: If I understood you
the changes
the change can only happens by individual action.
There is no social movement or political movement
corrective action.
Your thought is only sort of individual one or not?
Sadhguru: See, I want you to look at this properly,
there is no such thing as society;
there is you, me and that person and that person and that person.
Together we gave it a name called society
but there is no such thing in Existence.
It's only in our perception, isn't it?
In reality there is you and me,
you and me and you and me and you and me, so many.
You think there is a society,
there is no such thing.
Everybody is individuals.
If ten individuals behave properly, you think
‘Oh, this society is wonderful.’
No,
society is not wonderful;
there are ten individuals who are doing wonderful things.
If a million individuals do really wonderful things,
then you say this is a fabulous society.
There is… Society is not functioning wonderfully,
individual people are doing wonderful things.
That is why society gets the benefit, isn't it?
But actually there is no society.
It is just a word,
it doesn’t exist.
It's individuals.
If you want to transform a society,
you have to transform the individuals;
how else?
You can make one mass teaching.
Even if you make a mass teaching,
still to what extent each individual takes it,
that is the extent you find the result, isn't it?
Now as a humanity –
when there is no society, is there a humanity?
There isn't,
there are only human beings,
but as human beings on this planet
we are entrusted with a certain responsibility right now
as a generation of people.
Why I am saying this is,
for the first time,
for the very first time in the history of humanity,
we have come to a place
where we have the necessary capability,
resource and technology
to address every human problem on the planet –
nourishment, health, education, whatever, whatever.
Name it,
for everything we have resource,
we have capability and technology.
The only thing that is missing is
individual human beings who will stand up and make it happen.
Yes or no?
Never before this was possible.
Twenty five years ago, even if you dreamt of it we were not capable,
but now we are capable.
If we are not capable of doing something, that is fine,
if we are capable of doing something and if we do not do it –
if we do not do what we cannot do,
there is no issue,
but if we do not do what we can do,
we are a disastrous generation, isn't it?
It is my wish and my blessing that
we should not become a disastrous generation.
We
we should be able to turn it around
because everything else is on the plate,
only the man is missing, isn't it?
Do you see everything else is on the plate?
Only the man is missing.
Earlier it was not like that.
There was no resource,
there was no technology,
there was no capability.
Now everything is there,
only you and me.
Questioner: You are speaking to an adult audience today
and asking adults to change is obviously more difficult
to address the problem in an earlier stage.
How would you recommend to have the children changing at an earlier stage
and having them doing something else
than playing with the iPhone?
Sadhguru: In your perception, do you believe a child is more
supposed to be more sensible and intelligent
or an adult is supposed to be more sensible and intelligent?
What do you think?
Questioner: A child.
Sadhguru: A child?
That’s a dangerous perception.
The reason why everywhere in the world the laws are made like this,
even if a child commits murder we will not punish him as we punish an adult,
is because there is a margin.
Because he is still growing,
he doesn’t… his faculties are not fully there.
He is not fully responsible for his actions, isn't it?
Yes or no?
That’s the reason why everything in the world is structured like that.
So
to put it in the right perspective,
we are definitely expecting
adults to behave more sensibly and more intelligently than the child.
Child is given a huge margin because he is not yet there.
He… he is humanity in the making.
You are a human being.
So if you think it's an adult prerogative to be rigid, un-flexible
‘This is how I am,’
I thought this is only an Indian problem.
In India there are many people, you tell them something,
you say,
‘I am like this only.’
Now you are saying you are like this only.
No, no, no, you are not like this only,
it is just that to dissolve your rigidity,
you have not found a solvent.
I will give you a solvent,
we can dissolve your rigidity.
Right now, your rigidity has come to your body
because of a certain lifestyle
and because of certain attitudes to the mind,
nothing else.
Your body and mind –
let's look at it this way,
this is too little a time to look at these aspects
but I want you to think about it.
Your body,
your physical body,
over a period of time you gathered.
Isn't it so?
It's an accumulation
eggs, bread, bananas, this, this, this, this.
Body you accumulated or no?
Why are we not on talking terms?
I came all the way to speak to you.
Is body an accumulation?
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes.
What you call as your mind is an accumulation of impressions.
Yes?
What you accumulate can be yours,
I will not dispute that for now
but cannot be you, isn't it?
I am speaking now using this microphone,
suddenly I say,
‘This is my microphone’
you will think,
‘Oh, Sadhguru has got some problem.
After some time I say,
‘This is me’
then you will say, ‘Let's go.’
Let’s attend Martha’s class.
I am sorry.
If I claim this microphone is me,
just because I am using it,
would you think I am insane or not?
Yes.
Right now you are doing this every day.
Food appears on your plate,
you say ‘This is my food’
you ate it and then you say,
‘This is me.’
You need to look at this,
I am trying to do this shortcut,
it's not a good way to do it
but I want you to think about it.
What is not you if you think it is you
what is not you if you think it is you,
even the medical explanation for insanity is that.
Yes or no?
The medical definition of insanity is,
‘If I think I am the microphone’
the psychiatrist will say,
‘You need treatment.’
Yes or no?
What you gather can be yours; can never, ever be you, isn't it?
So there is something that gathers all this,
that is an intelligence which can make a egg into a human being.
Should you not access it?
Should you not make that dimension of intelligence possible?
I am not asking you to change;
I am not asking you to change.
Change is just a little improvement of the past.
I am not asking you to change.
I am telling you
as a human being you have come with a potential which is enormous.
When I say enormous
about two years ago the cell phone companies in India did a survey.
India is one of the biggest
not one of the,
the biggest growing… cell phone industry growing right now.
Sixty million phones we are adding per year.
So the company has made a survey
and they found ninety seven percent of the people
are using only seven percent of a cell phone’s capability.
This is
we are not talking about your smart phones,
the dumb phone.
Of the dumb phone,
ninety seven percent of the people are using only seven percent of its competence.
So, they must be contemplating,
even if we remove ninety percent of the software,
most people will not know.
Three percent complaints we can handle it
business, you know.
Now if a simple gadget like a cell phone,
if we are using only seven percent of its competence,
what do you think is the percentage of this super gadget
we are using right now?
I don’t want to talk percentages;
it's too low to talk about.
Questioner: Yes, you are comparing the body and the mind
and in fact for the body,
whatever you eat the body will select which is good for you
and will evacuate which is not useful.
How does the mind evacuate?
Sadhguru: The mind is also doing this
but its decision making may not be as good as the body is
because a part of it has been handed over to you.
If the mind was not in your hands,
suppose the digestive process is not in your hands,
you put something,
the stomach itself will decide what to take, what to throw out.
But now in the mind you choose,
so that’s why it's a mess up.
What should go out is not there
but even now there is a certain selection in the mind.
See, everything that your five sense organs come in touch with,
in wakefulness and sleep is recorded in your mind.
Suppose you walk from here to there,
actually there may be twenty five different types of smells.
Everything is recorded,
you won't feel it.
Consciously you will not know it;
only if somebody smells really bad or really good,
you will know,
otherwise if you just walk like this,
there are three hundred smells floating around in this hall;
every one of them is recorded in your mind.
To what extent means,
suppose you are fast asleep,
let's say you are fast asleep,
I come into your room and I speak in an Indian language
of which you have no clue
but you are fast asleep,
you didn’t even hear.
But twenty years later -
let's say I spoke twenty sentences
twenty years later we can hypnotize you
and make you speak those twenty sentences
in a language that you do not know;
experiments like this have been done.
So, everything is being recorded
whether wakefulness or asleep
but still all of it is not in your memory,
conscious memory,
all of it is not finding expression in your life
but all of it is influencing you one way or the other.
So I want you to know,
even with food
what your body absorbs also has impact on the food,
what your body rejects also has impact on your food
on your system.
What… what your body rejects,
don’t think it has no impact;
it has impact on your system.
Questioner: We hear in the video that your Isha Foundation has four million
two millions of volunteers.
My question is how do you manage to attract them?
Sadhguru: If anybody has to go crazy, it's me
because doing all this activity,
running various institutions,
do you know creating huge events on a daily basis all over
and making this happen with volunteers means
I want you to understand what it means to work with volunteers.
Nobody is trained for the job.
That’s the first thing.
You try to do something like this here,
you will know what it is.
And the next thing is you can't fire them,
they are volunteers.
If the ability to fire people is taken away from you,
you manage people and see,
you cannot fire anybody for incompetence.
So what happens is,
in a corporation
what you can do with one word
I do the same thing with one hundred words
because I have to win over this person,
otherwise she won't do what she has to do.
But the efficiency with which we function,
you come and see,
we are super efficient in everything,
far more efficient than most corporations.
That’s why they are coming to us for training.
I was conducting a program,
a three-day event for the top thirty executives of Microsoft, India
and I had about eight volunteers.
They were running around, doing everything.
After two days these executives,
their mouth watered,
you know they are always looking for attrition elsewhere.
They said,
‘Sadhguru, where do you find these people?’
I said,
‘You don’t find them, you have to make them.’
‘How do you make them?’
I said,
‘You have to make them fall in love with you.’
‘How do you do that?’
I said, ‘First you have to fall in love with them.’
They said,
‘Oh, they don’t pay us for that.’
So that’s how it is.
When people are passionately involved,
everything is a mess but with… with simple adjustment
you can do wonderful things
because human beings are functioning at hundred percent.
Nobody is trying to hold back anything,
everybody is trying to do their best.
Many times their best is quite burdensome
but that’s the whole thing.
So managing a situation like this
anybody can go crazy
but I will not go crazy
because that one thing I fixed.
What we have fixed is just this
see, for example human experience goes through various things.
Every human experience,
for example let's say peace,
suppose you lost your peace today,
what happens?
You go home and people at home,
the family gets the first dose usually.
If it continues
tomorrow you may pick a quarrel on the street.
If it continues,
you go and yell at your boss.
The moment you yell at your boss
everybody knows that you need medical treatment.
When you yelled at the family,
they thought it's normal.
If you start yelling in a situation
where it’ll have serious consequences for you,
people know you need treatment.
So you go to a doctor.
Initially the doctor tries to talk you out and it doesn’t work.
Then he throws a pill into you.
Pill means what,
little bit of chemicals.
Little bit of chemicals,
suddenly you become peaceful.
Maybe not forever,
at least for a short period of time,
or in other words what you call as peace is a certain kind of chemistry.
What you call as joy is another kind of chemistry,
blissfulness is another kind of chemistry,
ecstasy is one kind of chemistry,
agony is another kind of chemistry,
turmoil is another kind of chemistry,
anxiety and fear are other kinds of chemistries.
Whole human experiences,
a range of human experiences are different chemical basis within you.
Now we are talking about a technology
of creating the right kind of chemistry.
You are in a chemistry of blissfulness,
doesn’t matter what the situations are,
you are at your best.
Right now people’s logic is this,
‘If the situation is going wrong, I will also go wrong.’
This is a silly way to exist.
Especially if situations are going wrong
it's all the more important that you are on the track, isn't it?
Once you establish your way of being
and it cannot be disturbed by what's around you,
one thing that has happened to you is
you are free of suffering.
Once the fear of suffering is gone in your life,
only then you will walk full stride in your life,
otherwise every step that you take is a half a step,
‘What will happen to me?
If this doesn’t work, what will happen to me?’
To just to give you an example,
in 1998 certain experts from United Nations came to South India
and they made a prediction,
‘By 2025, Tamil Nadu, the state where we are,
sixty percent of this state will become a desert.’
I didn’t like predictions;
I don’t like any kind of predictions
because predictions about individual human beings
or societies are being made
without taking into account
what is beating in a human heart,
only statistics.
Looking at today’s numbers you are saying tomorrow’s numbers will be like this.
I said, ‘I don’t like this.’
When I drove around –
I wanted to see for myself if it's true,
I drove across Tamil Nadu just to see if it's real.
Then I saw that what they said was wrong
because it's going to happen much quicker than 2025.
Then I came back and said,
‘What to do?’
Then I saw in Tamil Nadu
there was only sixteen percent green cover.
The national aspiration is thirty three percent.
Then I made a simple barefoot calculation;
for the area that we have,
if we plant one hundred and fourteen million trees in six to eight years’ time,
in fifteen to twenty years
we will have thirty three percent green cover.
So I called a group of people and said,
‘We need to plant hundred and fourteen million trees.’
They said,
‘Sadhguru, do you know what's hundred and fourteen million?
How can anybody plant hundred and fourteen million trees?’
Then I said,
‘See, what's your population?’
‘Sixty two million.’
‘If all of us plant one tree today,
take care of it for two years,
plant one more, how many do you have?
You got the number.’
Even a beggar on the street can plant one tree.
He will have an office growing for himself.
He will have an office space going for himself if he grows a tree, isn't it,
a growing office space. .
So today we have, you know it's like almost twelve years now,
we have planted 16.7 million trees,
living trees not just saplings,
living trees
and this year we are planting six more million trees
and Tamil Nadu’s green cover has gone up by 7.2%.
It’s the only place in the whole of Asia where the green cover is actually going up
not down
and we did not give up our life to do this.
This is one of the side things that I am doing.
In a month I may spend about three to four hours on this project;
that’s how much time I allot for this project.
With three, four hours in a month’s time
I think it's good enough result.
I thought we will plant one hundred and fourteen million trees,
we have not gotten there. We are near twenty million.
It’s still a long way to go
but for three, four hours of investment it’s good enough.
That means management must be good, isn't it?
Because it is not management,
it's a big love affair.
People are in love with you, they will do it.
They will not fall in love with you unless you fall in love with them.
That’s the secret
You have to do it first.
Questioner: Thank you for coming; it's a pleasure to be here.
I am in the process of setting up an initiative called ‘My Drop in the Oceans.’
and the idea of ‘My Drop in the Oceans’ is to help people
to describe and to define their own drop in the oceans
in terms of their earning part and the environment,
the positive,
the services that we benefit from the environment.
And I just wonder these drops can be a multitude of actions
or you could describe them as one relation of actions,
I just wonder how you would describe your own drop in the oceans.
Sadhguru: See, the action has to be focused.
If it's multitude of actions, it will not go anywhere.
One of the most important things that’s needed is
any number of individual human beings are doing wonderful things
but the problem is they can't scale it up
simply because they do it their own way.
No,
we got to do it the way it works,
not our own way,
not my way,
not your way;
we just have to learn to do everything the way it works,
not my way or your way.
There is no my way and your way,
there is a way of the world. We have to do it that way.
There is a way of this planet, we have to do it that way.
Only then we will be a sustained success,
otherwise my way and your way is ambition
which is destroying the world.
Vision means we do it the way it works.
If you do it the way it works,
we will all do it the same way,
then there is no problem.
If you do it my way and your way, then there is a problem, isn't it?
Thank you very much,
thank you very much for being here.
(Sadhguru): So the energy,
the intensity of what this mountain can transmit,
what this peak can do to people
is too phenomenal.
if we have to generate this kind of energy,
enormous amount of work has to be done,
enormous.
Here it's ready, sitting there,
all you have to do is just look up and say, ‘Shiva.’
All you have to do is look up and be receptive to it, that’s all.
When such a energy basis is available,
this is the kind of energy which can be a base
for a whole spiritual revolution which can go through the country or through the world.
So we are seeing how to build the needed infrastructure
where people can come and we can give them the necessary tools,
go through 40 to 48 days of sadhana before they go up,
some simple sadhana which everybody can do and they can go up and reap
become absorbed by this energy or at least absorb a little bit of that energy and come down,
or never come down.
Because when Sadhguru Shri Brahma went up for the last time –
he went up many times –
when he went up the last time,
he said he will come back.
He went and left his body there.
So this is a mountain of a temple.
If you have to create that kind of energy,
what it takes is not simple,
it's not simple at all,
it would be phenomenal work,
so monumental it's almost humanly impossible kind of work,
but it's all done and kept ready just in a natural form.
If we don’t make use of this,
this would be very foolish,
especially for the local population
it would be extremely stupid not to make use of this energy
because this can transform everything that human being is.
Questioner: Sadhguru, I have a very difficult question.
For me, it’s a very difficult question.
Generally power corrupts everybody, including me,
but I am now in a very special spiritual path because I’m your devotee.
I want to avoid power overruling me,
making me corrupt, and… and I don’t want to be slave to that power,
whatever power I’m having.
Power is entirely corrupting the whole world – you know it –
but I don’t want to get trapped in that crazy thing.
Can you advise me, Sadhguru?
Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Power doesn’t corrupt, whoever said that.
People are corrupt.
When they get empowered, it becomes super visible.
When they’re somewhere, the microscope is not on them,
so you don’t see it.
When they come to a positions of power,
their corruptions finds volume,
a different dimension of expression.
But someone who is not corrupt will not become corrupt
because of this or that.
First of all let’s understand what is corruption.
The moment (Laughs)...
Fundamental definition of corruption, okay?
Later on I’ll come to the political definitions (Laughter).
The fundamental definition of corruption is just this
if there is something called as ‘me’
and there’s something called as you,
corruption has started
because what is me is more important than what’s you, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Once 'me' comes,
what is mine and what is not mine will come.
Once ‘this is mine’ and ‘this is not mine’ comes,
corruption is deepened.
If you get very attached to ‘what is mine’ and ‘what is not mine,’
then it’s well established.
Like this, it goes on.
So all I have been trying to do all these years is
to make corruption galactic.
The problem is it’s happening small scale.
So, all I have been saying is let us make
corruption cosmic
because the nature of who you are is such,
you have to identify with something.
If you identify with just this body,
one level of corruption.
Then you will get married and identify with two bodies,
another kind of corruption;
corruption multiplied.
There is a
There is a thing that used to go out – not anymore,
because things have changed now in this generation
in the previous generation when we were in school, college,
there was a thing going around in the universities.
It’s like this.
When you’re a student, everybody is a communist.
The moment you find employment, you become a socialist, you know?
The moment you get married, you become a capitalist.
The moment you get children, you have become corrupt (Laughter).
Because (Laughs) when your identification is with this body,
you’re already corrupt
but it’s so small scale, nobody notices it.
Or everybody accepts it,
“Oh, it’s natural.”
But when it becomes two, the corruption becomes little bigger.
People can see the conspiracy.
Family is the first form of corruption.
Yes. I’m not speaking against it, I’m just telling you.
It is so
because suddenly what is ours and what is not ours becomes important.
Then comes community,
then comes nation,
then comes race,
then comes religion – like this,
different levels of corruption.
Essentially corruption means
whatever thoughts of well-being,
acts of well-being that human being is able to commit,
he’s excluding somebody, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Yes?
Right now there is something here –
I want to give little more to this person, little less to this person –
this is corruption, isn’t it?
The more strongly you’re identified with what is me and what is mine,
you have become more corrupt.
Only thing is it may be
The question is whether it is socially accepted forms of corruption or not.
If something happens to your family, your children,
when buckets of tears will come
when children are running around without clothes or food in their belly on the streets,
no teardrop ever came to you, no thought came to you
you’re corrupt… essentially you’re corrupt.
If we make you the Prime Minister, your corruption will be reported in the media.
Yes (Laughs).
Right now your corruption is not worth reporting
because it doesn’t have so much consequence to other people.
But I’m saying if bucketfuls of tears will come
if your child’s life is in danger
and a whole lot of them running on the streets,
not one moment of anything,
that means you’re hardcore corrupt.
Yes or no?
You don’t like it?
It’s okay (Laughter).
Corruption is not always a conscious thing.
Most of the corruption on the planet is
because you’re identified with something limited.
Limited identity is corruption.
The moment you’re identified with ‘what is me’ and ‘what is mine,’
youare corrupt… essentially corrupt.
If you become the Prime Minister it will be visible to everybody.
Every single act that you do has huge impact on millions of people,
so it is seen.
Right now, between your right hand and left hand
you made one superior, one inferior –
in this state if you become a Prime Minister… (Gestures), isn’t it?
This is superior hand (Gestures),
this is inferior hand (Gestures),
you know.
So in this state, how can you not be corrupt?
You’re corrupt;
with empowerment it becomes more and more visible.
That is why we are aiming at the powerful
and the people who are in positions of responsibility and power,
because if you at least make their identity little larger
See, if you make your identity yourself,
you will rob the person next to you.
If you make your identity for your community,
you will do good things to your community at the cost of some other community.
If you’re identified with the nation,
you will do good things to your nation at the cost of another nation.
Yes or no?
But that is not perceived as corruption,
butit is corruption.
The whole world is full of corruption –
one against the other all the time, isn’t it?
‘What is mine should do well, what is yours should die’ –
this is corruption, isn’t it?
So it is not that power corrupts.
I don’t know who said that.
People are corrupt.
With power, corruption finds expression.
With power, everything finds expression.
If you’re intelligent,
your intelligence will find expression.
If you’re loving, if you become powerful,
your love will find expression.
If you’re corrupt, your corruption will find expression.
Without changing the basic quality of who you are,
you want to fix the outside –
no.
There is a tree which produces flowers,
there is a tree which produces thorns
the more you empower both of them,
one will produce more flowers,
another will produce more thorns.
So let’s fix the… our pedigree first properly
If you fix the… your pedigree first from where you’re coming
Have you come from your biological identity
or are you… have you
do you want to live here with your divine identity?
That’s the choice you have.
If you’re identified with the biology of who you are,
you will be anyway corrupt.
How can you not be?
Because biology is a limited process.
If you’re identified with this, everything outside will be outside.
If you’re identified with the Divine,
when you say, ‘I’m a devotee’, that’s what it means,
that ‘I have dissolved all my limited identities and my identity is with only one thing.’
If it is so,
you should become the Prime Minister of the world and it’ll be great;
world will be fine.
Not one’s well-being at the cost of another
well-being as it can be for all life on this planet,
that’s when you’re not corrupt, isn’t it?
Questioner: Sadhguru, Namaskaram
how to conduct oneself when, you know,
when you have a very exploitative spouse, you know?
Sadhguru: You’re talking about how to conduct him or yourself?
Questioner: Myself.
Sadhguru: No, actually you want to know how to fix him, right?
Questioner: No, Sadhguru.
(Sadhguru): So this is very important.
I’m particularly talking to you.
Please sit down.
It’s very important that we are straight with life,
do you understand?
What you want is your husband fixed,
but because you’re sitting in front of me you’re saying,
“Sadhguru, how do I fix myself to fit into this exploitation?” (Laughter)
which is not the truth (Laughs).
You want to know how to fix the man.
Yes or no?
Please tell me, all the ladies (Laughter).
If you perceive him –
we don’t know what he is –
we’re not talking about your husband.
I do not know what he is,
but if you perceive him as exploitative,
obviously you want to fix him, isn’t it?
If you perceive yourself as a problematic wife,
then maybe some thought about, “Maybe I want to fix myself,” will come up.
When you perceive somebody as exploitative,
the intention is to fix them, isn’t it?
But we wouldn’t want to be straight about that
because the culture doesn’t tell you
the culture tells you “Fixing your husband is not a good thing
you must fix yourself (Laughs).”
So if you get a headache, go for a foot surgery –
then the foot will be aching more than the head (Laughter) –
kind of fixed (Laughter).
At least your attention is gone.
So it’s time
If we are concerned about life it’s time
that we are one hundred percent straight, at least with ourselves.
Maybe in the world, we don’t know what profession you have,
what situations you have,
we don’t know how straight you can be –
I will not interfere with that,
but at least (Laughs) with yourself you must be hundred percent straight
very important.
Otherwise, neither yourself nor your life situations will ever get fixed,
simply complaining and going on.
Life will be a lifelong complaint for a whole lot of people
because they don’t want to address it,
they want to beat around it.
So, husband-fixing program we must do (Laughter).
No, we have fixed a whole lot of them,
because they become meditative and suddenly
their exploitative nature went away
because now they’re busy with something else.
So I… don’t want to get into a personal situation right now here,
but you must bring meditativeness into you and into your family.
This is something we have to invest into life now.
If you’re not able to fix your husband,
at least you must have a wish
that the next generation of husbands are not exploitative.
If you’re interested in that,
you must make sure your little boy that you have right now,
you must fix him now with some meditation.
Yes.
Meditation is not about fixing him against something.
It is just that meditativeness means
to become in such a way that you are not the source of the problem.
Wherever you are, you’re a solution, you’re not a problem.
If you become a solution,
everybody will want you wherever you are, isn’t it?
Whether it’s your workplace, your family, on the street, wherever
whoever seems like a solution, that person everybody wants.
Yes or no?
Either you are a problem
or you are one who complains about problems –
nobody wants to see your face.
You must know this (Laughs).
But if you’re a solution, everybody wants you everywhere,
including your husband.
He will desperately want you if you are a solution to his life.
Yes?
So it’s important – not just you as a person,
I’m saying everybody – it’s important we understand
we need to understand
if we don’t make this (Referring to oneself) piece of life a pleasant piece of life, first of all –
this the fundamental thing –
if you do this, after that you decide
whether you need marriage, you don’t need marriage,
you need children, you don’t need children, all these things you decide later.
When this (Referring to oneself) is miserable,
you have no business to multiply it.
Yes or no?
Misery – “I can’t get along with my husband.
I can’t get along with my wife.”
Already children, children, children coming, why (Laughter)?
If you cannot get along,
how is this happening (Laughter)?
Because… we have chosen to live unconsciously.
I’m not saying live this way or that way.
Whatever the hell you do, you do it by choice and consciously, that’s all
knowing the full implications of what it means.
Yes?
That much responsibility everybody must take, isn’t it?
If you do not bring (it) into this,
you will be a lifelong complaint.
I will not tell you how to deal with your marriage.
You bring this much into your life.
Before marriage, “No Sadhguru, I didn’t want, but my parents, you know, I got married.”
After marriage, “I don’t want to live in this marriage, but my children, you know?” (Laughter)
After the children have grown up,
“But, you know, I have to wait for my grandchildren.” (Laughter)
Tch. See, you have made yourself in such a way
that you are a result of an unconscious process,
you are not a result of a conscious process.
When you are a result of an unconscious process,
you are bound to be a miserable accident.
Yes.
It’s time every human being takes responsibility to at least change this much,
then we can talk about big things –
reaching the peak of your consciousness,
mukthi, moksha.
Don’t utter these words cheaply (Laughs).
Don’t utter these words.
First fix the fundamentals.
The fundamentals are just this –
whatever the hell you are right now, it’s yours.
Either you must have the courage to change it
or you must learn to settle into it.
Yes?
Yes or no?
You must
Either you must have the courage to change it
or you must learn to settle into it,
one of these things you must do.
Simply endless complaint for the rest of your life is no good.
It is just that we must understand if we are in a certain state,
everything feels like it’s against us.
You fix this (Referring to oneself), after that you decide which way your life should be.
You stay there, there’s a consequence,
you get out, there’s a consequence.
Everything there is a consequence.
But at least let it be a conscious consequence
instead of being a helpless, unconscious state of existence.
(Sadhguru): This sense of
no human being should live in an unconsecrated space
is something which is deep-rooted in this culture,
because it is just like if you plant something into this earth,
only if the roots are sticking into a rich earth
will the flower and the fruit come out.
If the earth into which these roots are sticking in are not… is not rich enough,
is not enhanced enough to sustain life,
flower and fruit will not come;
even if it comes it will be too meager,
it will never be a full-blown flowering,
it'll never be a full-blown fruiting of the plant.
So always these aspects
we paid enormous
gave enormous importance to these aspects of life.
It’s not just about what you eat,
it's not just about what kind of work you do,
what kind of space you live in,
this is very important in the East.
So people always consecrated their homes in whichever way they know best
and only then moved in.
If the kings were sensible and benevolent
they consecrated the whole town,
they created any number of places in the town
so that the whole town is consecrated;
he wants everybody to live in consecrated spaces.
If you walk on the street,
if you do business,
if you live in that town,
every one must constantly live in consecrated space
because if you want to produce generations of enhanced human beings
you need this kind of space,
otherwise only by accident
or by personal dint somebody may become something,
you won’t produce a generation of beautiful people.
This culture produced a galaxy of knowledge,
a galaxy of enlightened beings.
Every generation produced this simply because
they took care of any number of aspects like this.
Nowhere else on this planet
have single generations of people risen to such glorious heights of knowing
as this culture has known,
but all that got fractured in the last few hundred years.
In the last 800 to 900 years
this got badly fractured
because of invasions and displacement of people and so many things.
You can produce very great intellects,
very great energy, as human beings I'm saying –
individual human beings carrying phenomenal sense of energy and intellect and capability
if you create large spaces of consecrated space
large consecrated spaces where the whole generation of people
are in touch with that kind of energy and space.
This fortune almost every family had
because before they moved into homes they did this,
periodically they did something to enhance the house;
this was part of almost every house.
Every household at least once a year
conducted the needed rituals and processes
to see that the space in the house is enhanced –
a basic understanding
or rather an essential understanding of
how to generate a conducive atmosphere for a human being to grow to his full potential.
Sadhguru: This is the beauty of this world
if you do the right things,
whichever way, it still works.
You do it crying,
you do it with love,
you do it with joy,
you do it with hatred,
you do it with anger,
if you do the right thing it works.
This is the way of the world
as long as you’re doing the right things
it doesn’t matter how you do it,
it still works.
There is no such thing as only if you do it lovingly it’ll work.
No,
if you do it lovingly it’ll be beautiful for you, that's all.
The process will be wonderful for you;
otherwise it’ll be misery,
but it still works.
If you go and water these mango plants
with great distress,
still it works, mangos will come,
it's just that you can't enjoy it,
somebody else will eat it.
If you do it very joyfully, lovingly,
the first sight of the flower you will notice it,
maybe you will get to eat it;
otherwise you may not eat it but it still works.
So, this is the beauty of this existence
as long as you’re doing the right things
it works.
How you do it
will decide the quality of your life,
not whether it happens or not;
it’ll anyway happen.
It once happened,
there was a chicken farmer,
you know, the chicken farmer, a poultry farmer.
So, as a part of enhancing productivity
he was always researching
and one day he found a newspaper article
about how a man set a record
by laying 24,000 bricks in a day
bricklayer.
So, he was very inspired.
He cut this article out of the newspaper
and he was taking it into the poultry.
People asked,
‘What are you going to do?
Where are you going?
He said,
‘I am going to tell all my chicken
how this man laid 24,000 bricks in a day.’
You are hoping
it doesn’t work like this.
This is not the way it works.
A man laid 24,000 bricks,
you tell your chicken,
it’s not going to lay 24,000 eggs for you;
it doesn’t work that way.
Just to find out how this one works,
unfortunately people take a whole life time
and still they don't know how this works.
If you understand this much,
that if you raise beyond your discrimination
and if you’re able to look at everything as one,
if you have only one eye for everything
for this one kind of eye,
for this another kind of eye -
no,
not that.
You have only one eye for everything.
If you are like this,
suddenly your body will be full of light, it works.
So, this one thing,
just this one thing
if you can …instead of being here
if you allow your spirituality to go till here
if these two eyes get submerged
and you are able to see everything with one eye,
not with two.
You like this person,
you don’t like this person,
you love this person,
you hate this person,
you are okay with this one,
not okay with this one,
this one is nice,
you can't stand that one
if you just transcend that;
if you’re able to look at everything with one eye
sadhana will go to a different dimension altogether.
This one thing you must do;
otherwise lighting up takes lot of effort.
If you want to light up without this
it takes phenomenal effort
and it dissipates very soon.
See,
when you are …when you are looking at your life only as a survival process,
discrimination is a must.
You walk out on the street,
you are like any other animal in the forest
constantly looking
who is okay,
who is not okay,
where is the danger,
where is…where is a friend,
where is an enemy,
constantly looking out.
If you live in that condition survival gets taken care of,
yes,
but this discriminatory process if it exceeds its limits
then everything in the existence becomes regimented
and the chances of ever you lighting up becomes remote.
it is useful only for survival.
If you want to look at life,
if you want to perceive life for what it really is
you need one eye, not two.
The two will help you to survive
and that's all.
It is just that
over a period of time
survival… the word survival might have gotten complicated.
‘No,
that is not it,
it’s not just survival.
To carry my profession,
to pursue my career,
to do this,
to do that
I need discriminatory mind.’
It is just that you have complicated your survival process, that's all.
What used to be just food in the stomach at one time survival,
now it has become many, many, many things.
The survival process has gotten extremely complicated.
As the so called civilization happens
people did not get really civilized,
they complicated their savagery.
Simple savagery was you saw a man,
if you didn’t like him you speared him;
that’s simple savagery,
now it's very complex.
If you don’t like somebody
you will write a long article in the newspaper,
not mentioning anything about him
but you will maul him in a million different ways.
So, complicating
constantly going on complicating the survival process
will present you with many problems
and of course you could find solutions,
you could busy yourself in inventing problems and finding solutions.
What is the solution ultimately?
You will see,
if you go like this the only relief
both for the people who believe
they are finding solutions
and people who are directly,
who are straight forward about creating problems
and people who create problems in round about ways,
for both of them
the only relief ultimately will be to ‘rest in peace’
because that’s the only time they will know
what it means to at least lie down in one place
without rolling within themselves all the time.
Not one moment of stillness will you ever know.
If you have not known the beauty and immensity of being still,
to put it simply
you are actually ill.
If I sit like this
naturally you will think I’m ill, isn't it?
Is this not what's happening with your mind?
This is illness.
Your only comfort is
even the doctor is not able to see
because two shaking people can't see each other shaking.
If you can't get a handle on this life
do you believe that you have any grasp of the whole cosmic scape
or any other aspect of life?
You think it's possible?
It is just that
you will become dedicated to your psychological process.
What's happening in your mind,
your thought and your emotion becomes of paramount importance.
When your thought and your emotion becomes paramount importance,
to put it very simply,
what it means is
your petty creation has taken precedence,
it has become far more important
than the grandeur of the creator’s creation,
that's all it means.
That is a very, very small way to exist on the planet.
Smallest way for a human being to exist
is to be caught up in his creation
because what you can create here,
whoever you may be,
however powerful you may be,
however capable you may be,
what you can create is so petty
compared to the scape of creation that’s already happened.
If you want to know life,
if you want to taste life,
if you want to suck the sap of life
it's never going to happen through your psychological process.
(Sadhguru): So, the idea is to create as many consecrated spaces as possible,
and of course we are setting up small temples in people’s homes,
in the form of yantras,
in the form of larger Gudis,
because ultimately
that is the most impactful way of transforming human life on the planet
that you let it seep into people,
not as a teaching,
not as a philosophy
but just the very air that they breathe is transformative in nature.
This is the most effective way of doing it;
it just takes physical infrastructure to do it.
That is the
the flip side of it.
If we just make people meditative,
which is what we thought we will do
we just thought no need for a temple,
no need for any infrastructure,
make every human being into a throbbing temple of his own.
Well,
almost thirty years have gone by.
We definitely have touched lots of people,
but still
when I look at the people that we have not touched,
their numbers are far, far bigger
than the numbers that we have touched.
So the need for building physical infrastructure
for generations to come is definitely (Rings the bell) a necessity.
and I think it's time to invest our time, resources in that direction
that we create the necessary infrastructure for a spiritual movement
for transmitting technologies of inner well-being.
Sufficient energy infrastructure is needed.
we are hoping and waiting that many of you will grow in maturity and capability and everything,
so that when many things like this are put up,
people among you will stand up and take care of these things without distortion,
because this infrastructure involves ritual.
The reason why ritual has become an ugly thing in the world is
ritual leaves much room for exploitation;
meditativeness leaves no room for exploitation,
that needs preparation.
Ritual does not need any preparation,
anybody can come and participate,
but leaves room for exploitation.
So unless we produce people of absolute integrity and commitment,
who will not deviate at any cost,
no matter what,
they will not deviate,
unless we create such people,
ritual is a dangerous process,
but without ritual you can never touch larger populations.
Meditation will always be exclusive.
It will not be very inclusive.
Ritual is very inclusive.
People can come and participate without any preparation and benefit from that,
but people who conduct it must be of extraordinary integrity,
otherwise it will become loose and exploitative.
So I believe we are capable of producing such people
who will be beyond the temptation of exploitation.
If we manage to produce that
it's not that we have not produced any, we have,
but still (Rings the bell) not in the numbers that we wanted.
Volumes are still
not in line with the capabilities that we have.
So we need to generate those people who are beyond corruption.
Doesn’t matter,
if you hand over heaven to them,
they will still not in any way misuse it.
Such people we need to produce if we want to make ritual an active part of life,
if you want to make a larger spiritual process to happen in the society
which is beyond meditativeness,
because meditativeness needs lots of preparation.
Without preparation you cannot bring them to that state,
and preparing whole seven billion people towards that is a very onerous task.
and genuine spiritual atmosphere on the planet
will not happen unless we create big numbers,
otherwise spirituality will be always a few freakos (Laughter),
you know,
We don’t want spiritual process to be the domain of freaks.
We want spiritual process to be the mainstream.
That is the way to live for everybody,
other things we do, but the important way to live is,
the core element of this human being should be the most celebrated part,
not his little finger.
You don’t go about celebrating your little finger.
Whatever is the core element of this human being
that should be the forefront of a human being.
So if that is so,
spirituality will be the forefront of human life on this planet.
That needs to happen,
not just for liberation or mukti.
A time will
time is fast approaching where it will become a necessity,
just for even simple survival,
spiritual process will become a necessity on this planet.
We are getting there very fast.
Sadhguru: There are only two kinds of people in the world,
mystics and mistakes.
If your perception has made a mistake you're a mistake.
If your perception has gone beyond the mistakes
and beginning to see life just the way it is then you are a mystic,
to put it very simply.
Am I being too cruel to you?
Am I being too cruel to you?
If you want me to tell pretty things I can say, I'm capable.
I can say nice things about people
but
if you want to know,
the sooner you knock out all the nonsense in you the better it is.
If you're… if you're genuine,
wanting to know then you must knock out all the nonsense today, not tomorrow.
If your perception is changing at different times of your life,
obviously what you did yesterday
or how you saw life yesterday was a mistake.
What you was doing now is the right thing.
But suppose this changes tomorrow, this was a mistake,
tomorrow is the right thing
isn't this happening all the time?
So, there's a whole big mistake about the way we are perceiving life.
When it gets corrected people think you're a mystic
because you're beginning to perceive life in such a way
that you can never fit it into logic, its way beyond logic.
Logic is just a small part of your life,
you can never fit life into it.
You can fit logic into your life but never life into logic.
When your experience of life has transcended
the limitations of the sense perception
then you would be known as a mystic,
because you can make things happen
in a way that others cannot understand, so they call you a mystic,
which means they are admitting they are a mistake.
Nothing wrong in being a mistake,
but not realizing the mistake is the biggest mistake.
Because when we were born,
our sense organs naturally opened up because that is needed for survival.
I want you to know this,
when you were in your mother’s womb,
though you had eyes you could not see.
Though you had ears you could not hear
otherwise you would know how it is inside.
Only after you were born,
at the moment of birth your sense organs got opened up
because that’s necessary for your survival outside.
That was not necessary for your survival in the womb.
Only to survive in the world the sense organs are a must, so they opened up.
But anything that is beyond survival if it has to open up
it takes a little bit of striving.
For example, suppose let’s say when you were born as an infant,
you were left in a forest
and you never came in touch with human societies.
If something edible arrived in front of you,
you would take this and stuff it into your ears?
Is that so?
You would know where to put this, isn't it?
But would you know how to read,
how to write,
how to speak a language,
would you know?
No.
That took some striving.
Today, language is just flowing out of you like this
but I want you to go back when you were two-three years of age.
They asked you to write that damn A or Aa
oh, what a complicated nonsense this was!
You wrote it a thousand times to get it. Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
Just the alphabet A, how many times did you write it before you got it right?
Hundreds of times, isn't it?
Because of that striving, today
it flows like that.
So, anything that is beyond survival doesn’t open up for you unless you strive.
All the religions,
all the spiritual traditions that you see on the planet are just this striving.
Unfortunately over a period of time transmitting it from generation to generation,
generation to generation,
things get twisted out and end up being just a heap of rituals and belief systems.
Otherwise every one of them started off as human striving to know,
human striving to experience,
human striving to create well-being for himself;
somewhere it gets twisted out.
Everybody who is a mistake is a potential mystic.
If you're not a mistake then you're a lost case,
you're a fanatic.
You think you're absolutely right on everything, you’ve become fanatical.
If you know that you're a mistake
then you're a potential mystic
Sadhguru: Oh definitely.
It is not because our genes have become weak
we have become weak;
because…because we have become weak
the next generation will be weaker,
unless they really strive.
There is substantial scientific evidence to show
within a single generation
the genetic structure of a particular family or whatever
can deteriorate
there is enough evidence to show that.
Of course it can always be revived,
but will revival happen is the question.
When you are going to have an electric car
to drive from your sitting room to bedroom,
or you drive your bed wherever you go to the office
it may happen.
Maybe you drive in your bed to your office
and work there and sleep there and
because everything is touch of button,
or touching buttons also will go away
probably if you verbally say it,
everything will get typed and all the work gets done.
And you don’t have to use either your body or your brains
in any great length
definitely in a single generation
we can fall dramatically.
I think it's happening at an alarming rate.
If you look at the children today
simple things that all kids would be capable of when we were growing up,
today it's like circus for a whole lot of children.
Only very athletic ones can do it.
I was speaking to a group of
very elite group in Chennai.
Today these young couples and others
who are very well-to-do and in industry and things,
they all pride themselves that
they are all doing fitness,
they are walking on the treadmill.
Some of them are cycling
and of course they are all …all the ladies are wearing zero size whatever stuff,
they think they are fit.
So I asked them a simple question
“suppose all you guys are walking on the street,
if a tiger came or a flood came
or something happened,
how many of you can just climb this tree and save your life?
How many of you can do this?
Only the menial laborers!
Those who are doing laborer’s job on the street,
somebody who is building the road
or somebody who is digging a hole somewhere,
only that guy will save himself,
none of you will be able to climb a tree.”
They said yes.
Then that means what?
This is not fitness,
you can only walk on treadmill and wear zero size
by eating only salads.
If you eat anything more you’ll have indigestion.
This is not fitness.
You think you are fit
if you look trim and fit into a particular kind of thing.
No,
the very sinews of life within you have become weak.
I know this very well because
I find it's almost impossible to initiate
I would say among the people that I meet
there may be people in rural areas
who’re capable of this
but among the people who come to us,
ninety percent of the people are unfit for any kind of strong
any kind of strong Kriya Yoga because
they don’t have the body to do it.
They may have the wish to do it
but they don’t have the body to do it.
Their…their fundamental physical structure
They may look okay, they may look reasonably fit,
they can walk, they can do things
but they are not fundamentally strong within themselves,
the basic structure is not very strong.
That weakening is happening dramatically
and as these technologies make you do less and less
both in body and brain,
I think it is a very serious affair,
very, very serious affair.
It is the survival -
probably that is how we will decimate ourselves,
not by bombs or fire or riots or whatever.
Probably we just kind of peter out that
we won't have the strength to exist by ourselves,
and I don't know
Right now I know a whole lot of people beyond eighty, eighty-five
are on kind of different types of life-support.
This need for life-support,
the age at which life-support is needed
I am just thinking,
I’m… I don’t have all the facts on this
but I am thinking in fifty years’ time
if we continue like this,
the age at which human beings need life-support
may come down dramatically by ten, fifteen years
than what it is right now,
and that is serious weakening of human structure.
And the next generation
that that generation reproduces
will definitely inherit that
and the genetic structure if it weakens over a period of time
is definitely of concern.
So one of the things that we need to do
the reason when we set up the yoga center in America
we set up a thirteen hundred acre ashram.
Everybody said, “This is crazy Sadhguru,
we must buy twenty-five acres next to Atlanta
and do the ashram.”
I said,
“The ashram…the purpose of the ashram is not just to have a center
and meditate and whatever,
it's to regenerate life.”
I am not just saying one ashram is going to save this
but it is needed; in many, many places
this needs to happen
that we have to go back to the land.
We have to live with the five elements,
we have to be exposed to the earth,
we have to be exposed to the sky,
to the rain -
these things need to happen.
Without being in communication with all the five elements,
without being in communion with all the forces of life
all the forces of life are not just within your body,
it's just all over the place
without rapporting with it,
without confronting it,
without every day being in touch with it,
life doesn’t happen strong.
We need to live strong.
That is the purpose of yoga,
not just being frail and eating vegetables
and closing your eyes,
that’s not just that.
(Sadhguru): So once I went
those days,
today I just came back from Kailash,
from Kailash I went to Australia and back
so today when I travelled there’s a whole Jing-bang going with me,
okay
too much organization.
We got all kinds of boots,
we got clothes,
we got this thing and the gloves and the works and cars and the works.
You can't imagine,
too much organization.
At that time I just went by myself,
by local bus.
Generally I sat on top of the bus and went
because I didn’t want to miss the mountains.
And these are crazy buses.
They started four, four-thirty in the morning from Haridwar
and go straight to either Gourikund or to Badrinath –
they have to get there, so they don't stop anywhere.
These buses used to be called as Bhook Hartal buses,
that means hunger strike buses
because they won't stop anywhere for food.
The driver opens up his rolled up chapatti
and starts eating as he’s driving.
So you are sitting there wondering
where is the lunch,
where is the lunch,
no lunch.
So they are called Bhook Hartal.
So I went and sat on top of the bus
because I don’t want to miss even a bit of the mountain.
And electric wires will come.
He’ll just shout ‘bijlee’
which says ‘just lie down’ (Laughs)
and again get up.
So I went there without any kind of things.
That was not the first time I went.
I’ve been …I think about twenty-six years
I went continuously, every year.
And just my jeans and my T shirt
and I have my canvas jacket
which I used to ride in South India.
It's very good for the rain
but suddenly I realized when you go to the cold,
the damn canvas jacket gets colder than the atmosphere. (Laughs)
So I just went up
and I went to Kanthi Sarovar.
It was around three thirty in the afternoon;
I just sat there
and I didn’t know what hit me.
I just sat there with my eyes open.
It's an incredible glacier lake.
It's …as nature it's phenomenally beautiful.
My eyes are open
my mouth was shut
but I could hear my voice singing loudly around me,
very loudly like it's on a big microphone
and I’m just looking.
It's my voice clearly singing this chant.
For the first time I’m hearing it
but it's in my voice,
but my mouth is clearly shut.
So I sat there listening to this
and that’s what we chanted just now.
What it means is
sound,
nad means sound –
sound is not an appropriate translation but
in
in English language there is no appropriate word for nad.
Nad is more than sound.
Probably because there is no appropriate translations in English language
similar things have happened.
I think – are there any bible readers?
Anybody?
Nobody?
Oh.
I think the …I’ve not read
but I’ve only heard from people that
it seems the first part of the bible is about
‘first there was a word
and the word was with God
and the word is God’ something like this.
Iis that right?
Somebody knows?
Something like that.
See right now
whatever I am uttering right now
I am only making sounds
but you are interpreting these sounds as words, isn't it?
Yes
I am actually making only sound
suppose I spoke in a language that you do not understand
the word would be sound
and the sound would be word isn't it, in your experience
even now it is so but you think they are words
they are not words; they are just sounds
so
somewhere when it came to English language
sound would sound too abstract to somebody who made a word out of it.
What is a sound becomes a word in the human mind
but in existence the sound is just a sound, isn't it?
If there is nobody here in this hall
if I speak
it doesn't matter in which language I speak
as far as the walls are concerned it's just a sound.
Only if you come and sit here
you invent the words out of sound isn't it?
so nad goes beyond sound.
There is no appropriate word
but something more than sound because
Sound is not seen as a physical quantity
it is seen as the last bastion of physicality.
In yoga, we are looking at the sound
as the last state of the physicality
beyond that there is no physical
It means sound is everything and
sound is life
all the life forms are sound
sound means a vibration
today modern physics is proving
everything is just a revebration in the existence.
And what is karma and what is dharma means
what entangles you is karma
what liberates you is dharma
both are sound
what is bondage and what is liberation
that is also sound
what is referrred to as shiva and shakthi that is also sound
everything is sound
whatever you know as physical creation is a sound
because everything has a vibration.
Where there is a vibration there is a sound.
whether you can hear it or not is the only question
but there is a sound.
Wherever there is a vibration there is a sound.
you
All you need to do is just be the way you want to be. How do you want to be the top?
It's that simple, [but] [it's] also that far away
Isn't it is that simple?
After all you want to be joyful
Just be that way who is stopping you? No? No they are doing this see now
You don't want them to do what they want to do
But you want to do what you want to do
This is a problem
If you want to do what you want to do
You must also be [ok] with everybody doing what they want to do
That's the only way because freedom is a two-way stream. Isn't it yes?
now
Is somebody physically torturing you if that is so you come? We'll take you away
Because then you need to be protected
Nobody is physically torturing you. They're just doing what they want to do. They are saying what they want to say
Are they just saying just what they know?
Isn't it?
So who is causing the Mass within you?
Yourself because somewhere you believe if you become angry if you become miserable
It may pay off
And it does sometimes
Either more miserable people around you who value your misery it pays off isn't it?
yes, if you act miserable in the house you get many things if you joyful, maybe you don't get
Isn't it song so you learn the trick?
But what you need to understand is the trick is double-edged
if you're miserable
Whatever the hell you get it doesn't mean anything if you are joyful. You don't get anything so who cares
So this is not just your trick
Everybody around you has always been playing this trick, and you thought that's the way
But what is it that you want you want to be Joyful or miserable?
So just be the way you want to be does it infringe on anybody?
Does it infringe on anybody now now? I want to smoke
if I do
now this is going to
Cause some disturbance to somebody I
Want to just be happy is it infringing on anybody's anything?
Is it I'm asking
So you be the way you want to be who is stopping you? You cannot do whatever you want to do
But you can be the way you want to be isn't it?
Yes
Can anybody stop you others may not even know that [your] joyful if they like a miserable place give it to them
If they're like miserable faces give it to them, but you can still be joyful isn't it right now. We'll experiment. Okay
Right now a lotta face a joking joyful. I want you to maintain the same joy and look miserable [do] it now
Do it now?
Let me see you don't smile it
Show me a miserable face being Joyful within you you must practice
Please do it
Say this will be needed in your home
If you [are] all the [time] [hahahaha], they'll they'll go [crazy]
Sometimes they expect a miserable face
What's the spiritual about you all this damn yoga? Hehehe and all?
What's the problem?
Action should be the way the situation demands have I not been insisting on this all the time
But you tell me which is fast your way of being [is] [faster] [action] is [fast]
Which comes first?
Your baby, so if you say, I want [to] be joyful
establish that
action
as the situation demands
Some people like misery some people like laughter some people like crying do it I do everything
Just practice life in the Satsang. That's why [you're] here encounter with truth. You know
It should happen [here] not after you go
What I'm telling you is
Everything that you do is actually [act] isn't it too
Either you do it consciously or you do it compulsively if you do it compulsively you think it's real
but actually it's an act isn't it [so]
Everything is cooked up in your head, isn't it whatever you do. So it's any way an act
So do you want to do it consciously or do you want to do it compulsively? That's all the choices
So you'll do it compulsively, and you think it's real. It's a foolish way to exist
It's [anyway] an act at least do it consciously
Then life will be [beautiful] if you do it compulsively, it looks like a trap
It's not a trap life is not a trap
Because the exit is always there wide open
Yes, or no
Yes, or no life is not a trap the exit is always open everybody is trying to Dodge the exit
No
So if the exit was closed only then you can call it a trap isn't it?
The exists is always wide open one moment if you don't take care you will be dead
The exit is wide open your whole life is to somehow not to reach the exit
Isn't it so [so]?
[it] is not a trap
It is just that
If you think that your acts are all real then it feels like a trap
Whatever you think feel and do is your act isn't it so [listen]
When you do not realize, it's your act you think it's God given instructions you will start hearing voices
When you hear [voices] it's very clear you need treatment
so
If you ask this one this wants to be [as] pleasant as possible [isn't] [it]
yes, you want to know the highest state of pleasantness, isn't it so
So who is stopping you no, but they're doing this they're doing what they like?
You be the way you want to be if you establish your way of being
Then whatever you do
It's just a question of the situation depending on what kind of situations when you exist accordingly we act
No, no, I want to do my own thing. There is no your own thing now
I want to become iit professional. There is no such damn thing
Because you are born today in India you are thinking of it professional suppose. You were born here thousand years ago
You would be thinking of fishing in Ocean isn't it?
Yes, or no action is as the situation demands and offers isn't it?
how to be is yours
If you [have] decided how to be be that way perform action as it is necessary
you
[Sadhguru] Do you see this body -- as we have been going through this again and again to the same point
when it was born it was so small, now it became this much.
Definitely you didn't need any external stretching help to get it to this size, isn't it?
That which is the source of creation, what you refer to as the creator seem to be functioning from within you.
Isn't it so? Yes?
The creator is functioning, that is... that means the manufacturer of this body
and this existence seems to functioning from within you.
If the manufacturer is inside if you allow him to function,
fixing small flaws in the body you think it'll be a problem?
So, Shambhavi Maha Mudra is just creating a passage so that your innermost core functions.
If you allow it to function the nature of this - in yoga we refer to the your innermost core as the bliss body.
People have always talked for ages that if you come in contact with God
you will become blissful, you know, Brahmanand?
You know, they have been talking about this?
See, it's different ways of presenting it. Your innermost core is referred to as bliss body.
Now, all we are trying to do is the physical body, the mental body, the pranic body and the
etheric body we are aligning it in such a way so that
the innermost core within you, the bliss body finds expression.
The Shambhavi is not creating ecstasy. The Shambavi is just aligning these four so that this one,
the source of creation finds expression.
If the source of creation within you, the creator finds expression,
fixing your heart, liver or kidney you think it's a big problem?
Manufacturer, when he comes out and begins to function everything is fixed.
You will see miraculously health will become okay. I can show you thousands and thousands
of people who come out of their ailments just like that, like a miracle. Is it a miracle?
Anything that you don't understand you will call it a miracle, isn't it?
Suppose you don't know what is electricity and I tell you 'you just watch this,
I am going to press that wall and this hall will be flooded with light' would you believe me?
You won't believe me. You will say 'No, such things are not possible.'
Now, if I press it and suddenly there is light everywhere, now you think either I am son of God,
messenger of God or God Himself depending upon which culture you come from, isn't it?
Anything that you don't understand is a miracle in your understanding.
Either there is no miracle in life, everything happens between cause and effect or everything is a miracle.
Isn't this life a miracle? You and me sitting here on this round planet
which is going at a tremendous speed, is it not a miracle?
We sitting here and talking all this nonsense? Is it not a miracle?
[Audience] Yes.
[Sadhguru] So, if you look at it, if you have eyes to see, everything is a miracle or nothing is a miracle.
These are two ways to approach life; these are two forms of yoga.
One is to see everything as sacred; another is to see everything as utter nonsense
but now your problem is what you like is sacred, what you don't like is nonsense,
that's a problem, that's a trap. Everything is sacred; this is the beautiful way to live.
Everything is nonsense; that is also a very beautiful way to live.
What... these people are sacred, these people are nonsense - this will destroy you.
You said many times Shiva means "that which is not" then again
There is such you know Adi Guru, Adiyogi, the Shiva who lived in Kailash who lived in Kasi?
What is that? Like what is "that which is not" and what is this Shiva whom you talk as Adiyogi?

Shiva means "that which is not". When we said "that which is not" we are talking about a dimension. Which is not physical in nature.
Because our perception, our sense perception, is such that we can only perceive that which is physical.
See right now. You can see my hand because its stopping light. You can't see the air because it's not stopping light.
Though the air that you breathe right now is more vital to your life than my hand, isn't it?
But you can see this, you can't see that.
In other words our senses are geared to see only
what is required for our survival process.
Anything more than that if you want to see you need a certain enhancement of perception
So entire yogic system is enhancement of this perception
Yoga is not a philosophy it is not an ideology
It's not something that you believe in or disbelieve in it is something that you use
To enhance your perception, to sharpen your perception, in such a way you can see things that you're not seeing right now
You can hear things that you're not hearing right. Now see right now
The methodological department is saying the day after tomorrow it's going to rain
You look and see. Does your eyes say that?
No, it doesn't. But I'm telling you there are many birds and animals
here
which all know the day after tomorrow it won't do rain and
And it's not going to rain day after tomorrow, but you don't know. Why?
They are probably experiencing something different. This is it a fact in the evolutionary process as
Human beings we have the most evolved neurological system. Yes?
But they know we do not know, simply because most human beings have burdened themselves
With too much thought and too much an emotion
They have not learned this fundamental: how to handle their thought and how to handle their emotion.
So our own
intelligence has become an impediment that
We don't even see things that an ant sees or an elephant sees or a tiger sees or even a dog sees
If you can't find out something you bring dogs to find out today, isn't it?
Because this they seem to smell it out better. They seem to know things better than you
Because of that we created instruments
Because we have an intelligence which is of a certain kind and which is still new to us in
Evolutionary scale it's still new to us because of this we came up with
Tools
Mechanisms, instruments. So, we can't see up there. What is there? So we put a telescope.
Now Meteorogical Department is not run by the ants. It is
by human beings. They themselves cannot see, but they made instruments which will see.
Yes?
The ants may be able to see by themselves for their survival
We are not able to see because there is too much thought and emotion going on
But now we came up with instruments
Which will see for us which will hear for us which will tell us things which we ourselves are not able to do
So in this entire process
What is visible and what is not visible?
What has a physical structure and what does not have a physical structure? We started exploring all these things.
But the fundamental of our science or the pursuit of our science is called as physics.
Physics is the only real science. This is all offshoots of that.
So when you say physics you have clearly stated you only want to study that which is physical.
This is a folly.
This is the biggest mistake we have made. Now
we are saying only if it's physical it can be studied and it exists. Anything that is not physical does not exist.
Is it a fact that your physical body is an accumulation?
Yes.
Over a period of time you accumulate it. So
If only this is real
You as a person, you as a life, is not real. This is what we're stating.
I am saying this is where the fundamental flaw is.
So Shiva means "that which is not", so we are talking about, in some way
accessing that "which is not physical" or
Which is not in the purview of so-called physics or the modern science as we're talking about it.
Today Modern science knows that there seems to be something beyond. So now they are saying your logic won't get you there
So they're inventing something called as fuzzy logic, but still it's not enough because still you're trapped in your own
setups, because it's physics.
You are only willing to accept the physical as reality.
That means your very life is not a reality the life that you are is not a reality. Only your body's reality
So we have developed an entire culture based on this. Then you say Shiva.
In a way, you're transcending that limitation of
cultural limitations, scientific limitations, the mindset limitations that people have.
Then where did he come from?
if you grasp certain things and you got a certificate you have grasped certain aspects of
human body
We will tell you 'oh, she's doctor'. So how did you become a doctor? Because you perceive something. So, now, a
Yogi came
He never bothered to introduce himself
So we call him the first yogi.  Adiyogi means "the first yogi",  because he never told us his name.
Then somebody said 'but he's Shiva because he grasps "that which is not".
Because he grasps "that which is not" we also call him Shiva.
So
Right now in the popular culture he's Shiva, but in the spiritual culture. He's Adiyogi.
Because
for him - for us, he's a yogi. That's why we're interested in him.
Because he experienced "that which is not" we also call him Shiva.
Now
If you look here the male members of the people who are sitting here, more than 70% of them their names are
some expression of Shiva.
Have they realized something? Have they seen "that which is not"? No. But they are capable.
So we know their potential Shiva, so we call them also, Shiva. We may even
name our dog Shiva. Okay? We don't think it's an offense
Because a dog does not know "that which is not". A dog is not a yogi.
The dog is not going to realize either in his life, but we know he also comes from the same source. As
I came, as you came, he also comes from the same source. So we don't think it's a
improper thing to call our dog also yoga. Some people are getting very offended that I said this.
They can get offended because I don't think maybe they use the word dog as a derogatory term.
I don't think there's anything derogatory about being a dog.
Most people had trust their dog more than the human beings.
So as far as I am concerned I can even call a grasshopper, Shiva.
And I do. If I see a tree
I say Shiva. If I see a rock I say Shiva.
if I just look into the empty sky I say Shiva, if I see moon I say Shiva, if I see star I say Shiva
So are these rocks going to realize that they're Shiva? No, they may not realize, but I have realized. That's a big difference.
(Questioner): For spiritual life, whether one has to search for a Sadhguru
or it happens?
(Sadhguru): Where will you search
and how will you know
who is Sadhguru
and who is not Sadhguru?
You have no way to judge, isn't it?
So, how do I seek something?
You just seek.
You simply seek, ‘I want to know.’
The more you become ‘I do not know’
the deeper your seeking is, isn't it?
Seeking does not mean seeking something.
Seeking means
seeking that which you do not know.
If you have to seek, you should not make any assumptions.
Isn't it so?
You already made an assumption,
‘God is sitting up in the heaven,
I am seeking him’
this is not seeking,
this is just hallucination.
Seeking means simply seeking.
Seeking is possible only when a deep
‘I do not know’ has happened within you.
If a vacuum of ‘I do not know’ happens within you,
Sadhguru will happen to you,
you don’t have to search
because you don’t know how to search.
If you search with your intellect,
naturally you will search for that kind of person
with whom you’re most comfortable, isn't it?
See, if you seek a friend,
what kind of friend do you seek?
Do you seek a friend who punctures your ego every day?
You seek a friend who nourishes your ego every day, isn't it?
Yes or no?
If somebody punctures your ego,
he becomes your enemy, isn't it?
So, even if you seek a guru,
you will only seek with this context.
And that kind of guru who comforts you is no good to you.
There is nothing spiritual about giving solace to people.
It is just a psychological comfort which your family can offer,
which your dog can offer.
Dog is good solace for you, isn't it?
Yes or no?
You have pets at home?
They can be a great source of solace for you. Isn't it so?
You …don’t need a God for solace.
You seek the beyond
not for solace but for liberation,
to become free from everything that you are right now.
So, if you are seeking a guru for solace,
there are many.
If you are seeking a guru for liberation,
then if you sit with him you feel threatened,
you want to run away from him
but at the same time,
you don’t want to leave him for a moment.
If you constantly feel threatened by him,
at the same time you want to be with him,
that means he’s a good guru for you.
If you are very comfortable with him,
he is a no good guru for you.
You must be constantly uncomfortable with him;
at the same time, you long to be with him,
that is a good prescription for you.
Sadhguru: Overwhelming experiences in certain places, especially Guptakashi and Tapovan.
If I could explain what is the basis of these experiences
These are two different kinds of spaces
Guptakashi and Tapovan.
Tapovan, maybe because of the altitude you felt light-headed.
It is a place which has been graced by many wonderful beings.
Wherever they go, they leave their eggs,
that’s their way of life.
if you leave your eggs in Bombay or in New York City or anywhere else,
people will trample on it and go
because they won’t have the sense to recognize what’s been left around.
So the yogis also,
people who have the privilege and the burden of carrying a dimension
which is not in the experience of common people
also wherever they sit and stand they lay their eggs,
but why they always moved to hilly regions?
Certain spaces which are identified as sacred is simply so that
these eggs are not trampled upon,
but rather experienced, made use of,
so that something will fly out of it.
So they choose places,
Tapovan has been one bird’s nest
where many, many yogis have chosen to lay their eggs,
but the biggest pit of eggs is probably the Kedar.
Kedar, every kind of bird laid its eggs,
multicolored, and they gotten all mixed up.
So if you have been initiated in a certain way,
you become open to a certain aspect of experience.
There are so many other things there which you are not open to,
but if you are initiated in a particular way,
you become open to that particular dimension.
the whole basis of creating temples in India is just this
a certain egg is laid and you are supposed to approach it in a certain way.
For every deity, there is a certain type of approach
so that you can experience that.
Guptakashi it’s very much in the line of Agasthiya’s way of doing things
which is pure kriya,
which is 100% energy work.
No other things,
no mantras,
no tantras,
no nothing,
it’s 100% energy work.
That’s the way I am,
that’s the only thing I know.
I can just transform life from one dimension to another,
simply on the basis of energy.
I don’t know any chantings,
I don’t know any rituals,
I don’t know anything.
Without any ritual, simply, you know,
just switching the energy from one dimension to another.
Kashi is the holiest of holy cities,
one of the most ancient cities of learning.
This was a place where hundreds of enlightened beings lived at a time.
Every street you walked,
you had an enlightened being to meet.
So, it became a tradition in this culture
if you want to die, you must die in Kashi.
If you die in Kashi, your liberation is guaranteed
because there are so many enlightened ones
every day, they come to have a bath in the Ganga.
All you have to do is just have a glimpse of them,
and when they see that your time is near,
definitely they will help you and you’re through.
So even today it is believed,
when you come to a certain old age,
people travel to Kashi,
wait there to die.
This tradition came simply because
every generation saw hundreds of enlightened beings living in Kashi
and it became the greatest core of learning.
So Kashi means the holiest of the holy.
So that is the main Kashi,
what we went to yesterday
what we left today morning is Uttarkashi,
Uttarkashi means the northern Kashi.
What we went the other day, just after Kedar is Guptakashi, the secret Kashi.
Nobody is supposed to know about it.
All these Kashis have very powerful lingas which are referred to as jyothirlingas.
They are self-created, they were not created by anybody,
they are self-created,
they grew out of the earth in the form of a linga.
People recognized it and worked upon it to make it into something else.
Questioner: Many times in my daily life
fear stops me from doing small things and bigger things -
fear from failure,
maybe from rejection sometimes.
How to overcome this fear?
Sadhguru: You cannot overcome something which does not exist.
Right now, are you in fear?
Right now, that I may say something damaging?
Is that the fear? (Laughs)
Every moment of your life, you are in fear?
No.
So, when you are not in fear,
just stay like that
because to create fear,
you have to use excessive imagination.
To not be in fear,
you don’t have to do anything.
Fear is happening because of excessive imagination -
things that have not happened,
you are creating.
What may happen in your mind
happens in thousand different formats
and most probably it never happens.
The things that you have feared
Take hundred things that you have feared.
Probably ninety nine of them never happened, isn’t it?
Yes?
So, your fear is always about
that which does not exist.
You cannot fight
or you cannot overcome
that which does not exist.
We can overcome something which… that exists.
You cannot overcome that which does not exist.
We just have to give up that effort.
Enjoy the fear.
After all, it’s your making.
You like horror movies?
Yes.
I mean, you are saying no
but you are producing them.
Just they are not making money, that’s all. (Few Laugh) (Laughs)
Fear means you’re producing horror movies in your mind.
Nobody else is willing to watch. Tch
That’s bad for the producer,
but you are producing them.
So, you produce something else -
produce a comedy,
a love story,
suspense thriller -
try and see today.
Just sit down, produce a love story,
a suspense thriller,
a comedy -
five five minutes movies you make in your mind,
really.
Yes.
Start using your mind differently.
It’s gotten into your pattern.
It’s just gotten into your pattern of just creating horror movies all the time.
You have watched enough horror movies, they’re boring.
Create something else. (Laughs)
Even… It’s not that if you produce these movies,
those things will happen in your life.
Still they may not happen.
At least you enjoy the movie. (Laughs)
In reality, it may not happen, so what?
At least you enjoy what’s happening in your mind
if you cannot enjoy what’s happening in the world, isn’t it?
That much privilege every human being deserves. Isn’t it so?
Even if the world is not kind to him,
at least his own mind should be kind to him -
so produce some nice movies. (Laughs)
peace is not the ultimate goal of life
it is the most fundamental requirement
if you hold it as the ultimate goal in your life
you will only rest in peace
Sadhguru, the number of projects you handle, Isha handles, are just numerous and
I mean, how do you handle that? I mean do you
have that like a very clear blueprint in your mind? Even if you do,
How do you bring the volunteers to exactly execute what's in your mind?
I have the most wonderful people around me. This is the biggest gift. I have most wonderful people around me
apart from that,
this will be very hard for your viewers to digest, but let them have little indigestion
Let them sit up and think about this as I sit here.
I am talking to you, am I talking sensibly?
Do I look focused?
very
Nobody has ever seen me unfocused on anything.
But at the same time, I have at least 12 to 14 tracks running in my mind all the time.
So I may be talking to you, but I am sorting out many many things. That means
in a way, compared to a whole lot of people, if they think one thing they can't think the other thing,
I have 14 people in one.
I could increase the range if I want, I'm just little lazy.
So I don't want to spread it if little more striving I can spread it much more
but you know
Here and there. I enjoy a little bit of laziness. I thought 12 14 tracks is enough and if they're running well
So at the same time I will be designing something. I will be creating something
I'll be preparing something everything will be happening at the same time
This is what being human means
unfortunately
Most people utter the word human only with reference to the limitations of being human
Very rarely anybody says. I'm human
referring to the immensity of being human
They are always saying Oh! I am only human
So this is what I want them to realize this is what Adiyogi means
112 different ways through which you can find solutions of transformation
solutions or means for transformation
For your immediate needs and for your ultimate needs
both
This dimension of science where he is talking about
the entire nuts and bolts of human mechanism and the nuts and bolts of cosmic mechanism
and how these two things will fit into each other absolutely
without any friction. How you can be a part of the cosmos? How the cosmos can be a part of you?
This is not logically correct, but when the Saptarishis asked him
What is the nature of this existence? Where does it begin? Where does it end? How big is it?
He laughed and he said I can pack the entire cosmos into your mustard seed
So then they asked if you can pack everything into a mustard seed is it big is it small?
What is its nature? What's its composition?
How can it be big and small at the same time?
By then he was bored with that
Then he just said like this
fine
Look, it's just five elements
If this five elements if you understand if you grasp these five elements you grasp the entire creation
The physical world is finished with five Elements
Earth,Water, Fire, Air and Space. If you know these things you know everything with these five things how much mischief
you see
Can you believe with five elements just with five ingredients? How many things have been created in this cosmos?
so he just said this is all you need to get so that's why we call them Bhooteshwar
the Master of five Elements
you
[Sadhguru] We have something called as Sanathana Dharma.
Sanathan means eternal, timeless.
Dharma does not mean religion; Dharma means law.
So they were talking about eternal laws which govern life
and how we can be in tune with it.
Right now, whether you've been to school or not,
whether you're a great scientist or not, still right now you're complying
by all the physical laws on this planet. Yes or no?
Otherwise you couldn't sit here and exist.
So similarly there are other kinds of laws which are not physical in nature
which govern the life process within you.
So they identified these things and they said,
'These are the laws which govern one's life.'
But over a period of time, every enthusiastic person
that came from generation to generation went on adding their own stuff
according to the necessity of the day
or according to the necessity of the vested interest of the day, in so many ways
it's happened, all kinds and people added many things.
But essentially your sanathan dharma is just this.
Sanathan Dharma identifies a human being cannot rest,
do what you want, you... he cannot rest because he longs to be something
more than what he is right now. You cannot stop it.
You teach him any kind of philosophy, you cannot stop it.
Whoever he is, he wants to be little more than who he is right now.
If that little more happens, he will seek little more and little more.
So if you look at it, every human being unconsciously is longing
to expand in a limitless way. So every human being unconsciously is
looking for a boundless nature or a limitless possibility or in other words,
every human being knowingly or unknowingly has an allergy for boundaries.
When you threaten his existence, his instinct of self-preservation
will build walls of, ...you know, protection for himself.
The same walls of protection, when there is no external threat,
immediately he experiences it as walls of self-imprisonment.
So they recognized this and said every human being is longing... limitless.
So first thing that you must do, the moment a child becomes reasonably conscious, -
the first thing that you must put into a child's mind is, your life is about mukti,
about liberation. Everything else is secondary because the only thing that
you're truly longing for is to expand in a limitless way.
There is something within you which can't stand boundaries.
So for this what are things you should do to head in that direction;
they set up simple rules. If you do this, this and this,
you will naturally move in this direction. You can't call this a religion, okay?
Because this is a place where you've been given the freedom - you can make up your own god.
Devi Shetty: Sadhguru,
many years ago,
when my son was a little kid,
he gave me a book written by Swami Vivekananda.
He was describing
how ancient gurus could communicate with each other
thousands of miles away,
just by thought.
It’s essentially
it’s like a modern internet
how one computer can communicate with another computer in US or Europe, anywhere.
Do you believe that human mind can be trained
to influence another human mind or people’s mind who are far away,
just by tuning our mind to the right frequency?
Can it be trained,
can we… can we learn that art?
Sadhguru: You are trying to beat the cell phone companies (Laughter).
It’s not just about the mind
see when we say mind,
the English word mind, is only
generally referring to only the thought process.
Thought process is the most surface element of your mind.
I think because of European thought,
we have given too much significance to the thought.
In the yogic science,
we do not attach any importance to what you are thinking about or feeling right now.
Because what can you think?
Only the data that you have collected, you’re recycling it.
It’s of no great consequence.
Whatever is in the surface of your mind keeps rolling.
That is not of any consequence.
What you are thinking and feeling right now is very surface of mind,
there are deeper dimensions of the mind.
In Sanskrit language,
there are many many words to describe the different states of mind.
But now there is one aspect of the mind,
for lack of time and stuff I’ll leave those things.
There is one aspect of the mind which we refer to as “chitta”.
Chitta is the innermost core of the mind,
which is your connection with what we are referring to as consciousness.
If your chitta becomes conscious,
if your chitta acquires a certain level of conscious control if you acquire
now you have access to your consciousness.
What we are referring to as consciousness is that dimension
which is neither physical nor is it electrical, nor is it electromagnetic.
It is a quantum leap from physical to non-physical dimension.
A non-physical dimension being the lap of the existence,
it is the non-physical in whose lap the physical is happening.
Physical is a small happening.
In this cosmos not even two percent,
or not even one percent is physical,
rest is non-physical.
This non-physical dimension in the yogic terminology,
we use a specific sound which is connected with that dimension.
Today it’s all very… highly distorted,
we call this “Shi-va” that means “that which is not.”
We… when we say Shiva we are not referring to some man sitting up there.
We are talking about a dimension which is “not”,
but it is in the lap of this dimension everything that is happens.
So if your chitta becomes even mildly conscious,
your ability to not only communicate an idea, or a thought,
even to deliver something is possible,
physically deliver something is possible.
So is it a possibility?
Definitely it is.
Right now can we teach it to all these people?
In theory, yes.
But are they willing to work towards it, that’s a question mark.
One big problem is
our education systems are such,
we have glorified our thought to such a place,
first to bring that down itself will take time.
To make them understand the stupidity of their thought,
it will take a whole lot of time.
Because everybody thinks they are smart.
But actually the smartest thing about most people is their phone (Laughter).
Because your thought process is just an outcome of the limited data that you have gathered.
It doesn’t matter if I have read the libraries of the world
still it is too limited, compared to what it is,
what the creation is.
With all the scientific development, we still do not know
how a leaf really works.
Devi Shetty: Yes.
Sadhguru: We do not know how a single atom in its entirety we do not know,
with all the scientific exploration.
So that
that should be humbling enough for everybody to know
that we hardly… we know how to use things
but we do not know what it is.
It will take lifetime of attention to even grasp the fundamentals of what it is.
So if people are willing to first of all understand
like the whims of their heart -
you just dismissed as dumb, (Laughter)
okay
if they also understand the so called smartness of their thought process and emotion is quite dumb,
now it becomes easy.
It becomes easy to train people that
communication need
It’s not like now I want to generate this thought and give it you,
not like that.
Things will happen to you before you think.
What… what is best for you will simply happen to you
even before you articulate in your mind,
you don’t have to ever think what you want to become,
how you want to be.
Life will just arrange itself.
An intelligence beyond what you can contain in this bone box (points to skull)
starts working for you and it will work.
You have heard of Ramanujam and others just opened a window with their Devi
and he becomes that kind of a mathematician, which is….
you know even today, they’re
after one century they’re still trying to figure out what he said.
And the mathematical calculations th… that he gave
is the backbone for describing the black holes in the universe.
When he was there,
there was no word called black hole, nobody knew there is such a thing.
When we say black hole, what we are talking about is
the curve of time and gravity,
which is something modern science is battling with,
he made mathematical background for that.
As the curve increases, it… what is in existence,
physical existence becomes non-existence.
So this is what it is,
when we say yoga,
you reduce the curve in such a way,
that what is largely physical becomes non-physical.
Once it’s non-physical, time and space is not a issue.
Once time and space is not a issue, communication is simply there (Applause).
Sadhguru: My heartiest Diwali wishes to everyone.
Diwali is celebrated for various reasons
but the most important aspect of Diwali is
historically, what this means is
a very cruel, strong man called Narakasura was slayed
on this day by Krishna.
That is a few thousand years ago.
But why do we celebrate that today?
A man was killed –
however evil he was –
many thousands of years ago,
should not be relevant to us.
But the relevance of Deepavali is that
this is not about Krishna slaying the evil in somebody else.
This is an important inspiration for us
to see that we are able to remove the negativities in our lives
because it is only by removing negativity
that new clarity will arise.
Only when there is clarity,
there is new sense of light.
It is from this context that on this day,
the entire country
in your homes,
in your cities, in
right across the nation -
we are lighting lamps to indicate a new light has risen in our lives.
We need to understand this –
even if there is light around us,
if we have no clarity in our vision,
we cannot see that light,
we cannot experience the light,
we cannot enjoy the light.
So the significance of this festival of Deepavali is
that we bring a new clarity within us.
This clarity will arise within us
only when we remove the cobwebs of the past,
only when we remove the cobwebs of our prejudice,
only when we remove the veil of ignorance within us,
that a new clarity will arise.
It is this clarity, which leads to light.
On this Deepavali,
may you arise into a new level of clarity and vision.
Let there be light in your life.
Manisha Koirala: I spoke to you in the morning
and you were sharing about
Isha Foundation’s ground work that you’re doing with children because
children are our future tomorrow and to
I would want you to share what you have told me,
about the teaching that you were training the children,
to the audience because
I think that’s brilliant, what you were sharing.
Can you please repeat that, Guruji,
about the work Isha Foundation is doing
in educating the children?
Sadhguru: See, when we say education,
what is the purpose of the education that we’re doing?
At different stages of evolution of a culture or a nation,
we need to educate people differently.
Suppose we were at continuous war,
we would be training our youth to fight.
Right now, we are in an economic pit
and we see a possibility,
right now we’re talking about entrepreneurship,
entrepreneurship everywhere.
So like this,
at different times,
we need to train them for different things.
Having said that,
we know that sixty-five to seventy percent of the Indian population
is in rural India.
I don’t know what images people who live in cities,
have about rural India,
but it's a pathetic life today.
It's not a peaceful, countryside living.
It's bad, okay?
Nourishment is bad,
infrastructure is bad,
everything is bad.
Life in rural India is no more
that idyllic,
poetic stuff –
it is not –
because we tried to shift from
what is called as subsistence farming to commercial farming.
It should have been done in a planned way,
in a time-bound manner.
We have this problem about not having timelines for anything.
Whatever it is,
we don’t have timelines.
We think we can do it eternally.
Manisha Koirala: We don’t plan.
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Manisha Koirala: We don’t plan,
focused planning (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: They’re having their clock ticking.
No,
there is no timelines –
when… when is this job going to be complete?
We think we can do
See, we’re talking about being a developing country.
We’re developing, developing, developing.
Tell us, when will we be developed country (Laughter)?
If we are developing,
at some point we must become developed, isn't it?
Is there a target timeline? Okay, by this year,
we plan to be a developed country
and these are the goals –
there is no such thing.
We’re going on developing.
Like this,
agriculture moving from subsistence to cash farming,
it should have been done in a planned time-bound way.
We just let it be like that.
So these people, who had one acre, two acres, three acres of land,
they were growing what they need on their land
and they were eating well.
They had no money,
they were in rags,
they had no drinking water,
no electricity,
but they were robust.
A village person means he was robust.
Today, you go into the village,
they have drinking water,
they have electricity -
some villages still don’t have
but largely they have –
everybody has a cellphone,
they have internet kiosks.
But you will see sixty percent of the rural population in India
has shrunk like this (Gestures).
Their skeletal system has not grown to full size
because they’re malnourished.
When they were eating food grown on their land,
they ate variety of things.
Today he is growing sugarcane,
he gets cash in his hand,
he comes and watches your cinema (Laughter)
or gets drunk.
Not wrong,
I’m saying that’s the only entertainment he has,
let him watch (Laughter).
There’s nothing else in his life –
either a cricket match,
or a cinema,
or drink.
There’s really nothing else.
I mean, what is el… what else is there in the village?
A cricket match,
or a cinema,
or drink –
these are the only three things,
which make it worthwhile living for him (Laughs).
Otherwise, everything is dreary, hard work,
no result.
When we did agriculture as subsistence farming,
they… If we,
today, we are ploughing means there is a ploughing song.
To… Tomorrow, we are weeding means weeding song.
Planting means planting song.
Like this, there were
Harvest means harvest songs and dance.
There was a community. With that, they were doing agriculture.
Today, you go into the village,
two-two acres are all barbed wire fenced.
“My land is my land, your land is your land.
I won't let you step into my land and I… you
I can't step into your land.”
You can't run agriculture like this for this kind of population.
It needs a community, it needs a certain joy,
it needs a certain involvement and relationship.
You just want to do commercial thing,
then you should have done something else.
You should have merged everybody’s lands and run big farms.
Unless your land tract is large enough,
there is no way to make agriculture profitable.
There is no way.
And if it's large enough,
you need a community.
“Today, everybody comes and ploughs in my land,
tomorrow all of us go… go and plough in your land” –
this is how things were happening.
Now for everything, I have to pay money.
When I pay everything, in the end all I have is debt.
So, the education for them is only to get out of this economic pit.
So at six, they will start English language and computers.
Within one year,
all of them (Laughs) are speaking fluent English in our schools.
Sixty percent of them are going to school.
This’s the first generation going to school
but they are fluently speaking in English.
You should see the joy on the parents’ faces
because they think their children have been
to another planet (Manisha Koirala laughs).
They come and they start talking in English (Both laugh).
It's an unbelievable scene,
it's something you must see.
Tears will come to you if you enter the school.
That is one form of schooling,
where mainly towards employment,
mainly towards moving them out of that situation.
Another form of education is
we have Isha Home School,
which is for the affluent,
which is run by highly trained volunteer teachers.
And this is a household kind of school,
where every twenty children live with a committed couple,
who bring them up till
from age of six to a certain point.
All schooling happens largely in the home,
except for labs,
playgrounds and libraries.
From eighth standard, they move to the high school,
which is there.
Our eleventh and twelfth is not two years,
we made it three years
because we are bringing so much talent into them
in terms of music, art, theater, leadership, business,
various aspects,
so that when they step out into their undergrad,
they are very mature and competent people.
So I said, “One year extra.
If you want to do schooling with us, it is not twelve years,
it is thirteen years.”
So you cross the bad number also (Both laugh).
Manisha Koirala: It's really brilliant, Guruji.
Sadhguru: And another form of education is
where there is no academics.
These children come at six
and they have to commit for twelve years’ stay.
Here, we teach only yoga,
kalaripayattu (Referring to an ancient Indian martial arts tradition from Kerala),
classical music,
classical dance,
Sanskrit language
and English language.
This is focused
just to build a human body
and the human brain to its fullest capability,
without any intent.
The most stupid thing is asking a three-year-old child,
“What will you become?
What will you become” (Few laugh).
“I want to be a doctor” – at the age of three (Laughter)!
So, without thinking what I will become,
just growing this body
and growing this brain to the fullest capability,
with utmost balance.
You will see these children,
if you come and see them, they can sit like this (Gestures)
unmoving for five, six hours, okay?
Age of twelve-fifteen years of age,
they will simply sit like this (Gestures)
unmoving for five, six hours at a time.
That’s the level of stability
we brought into them (Laughs).
Manisha Koirala: Wow! I… Guruji, actually
Sadhguru: Most adults cannot do it.
Manisha Koirala: I know, I know (Sadhguru laughs).
I mean, forget five, six hours,
I think for one minute is also difficult (Both laugh).
Two minutes is difficult.
Sadhguru: Hey, one minute is a bad case (Laughter).
See when a child is handicapped either physically or even mentally,
a child is not suffering; parents are suffering, isn't it? A child is incapable
but not suffering. Have you noticed this? Even a mentally handicapped child
he is not suffering; actually he is more free of suffering than lot of other children.
Parents are suffering because their child is not like somebody else’s child.
It's the parent who is suffering because the parent knows the consequence of this child
living in the society; he doesn’t have certain capabilities; what will happen
to him tomorrow.’ With these concerns the parent is suffering. Isn't it so?
The child is not suffering. The child is incapable, handicapped means
just that. Handicapped, the word itself says that.
So a handicap has come, why? A certain manufacturing defect.
That’s what you are talking about, isn't it? All this may sound very brutal to you,
the way I am talking; it’s very brutal but I didn’t create this brutality.
Life is like this, isn't it? Yes? Your creator is brutal;
I am only explaining his brutality. I am bringing clarity to his brutality;
I did not create this brutality, isn't it? Yes or no? Somebody is born with half a brain;
I didn’t create it but if you are saying this is the work of the creator
this is creator’s brutality. Either you see it the way it is and see what we can do out of it
or you don’t see it. Today we no more call them as handicapped children;
we call them ‘Special children.’ They’re special because they are not like other children.
They are different. That’s a good way to look at it.
They are special children. It is just that because you are comparing the child
to some other child you are thinking it is handicapped.
Otherwise it is a special child. Suppose do you know, you are printing currency notes;
All 100 rupee notes are supposed to be one way except the number but
one 100 rupee note went crazy like this. Do you know a collector would pay
a …million rupees to buy that 100 rupee note?
It’s a special currency note, a freaky one. You can't buy anything out of it but
still it is special currency note.
This is just like this. A child, something has gone not…not the way
it should go normally, it’s gone some other way.
You don’t have to make everything into a suffering;
that’s what I am saying. People who have normal children,
who have all their limbs and everything in place, are they not suffering?
Because the child is not listening to what you think they should do
you’ll suffer, isn't it? So your suffering has nothing to do with the handicap;
nothing to do with well-being; your suffering is just that if anything happens
that you think should not happen you will suffer. Or in other words
you want the whole existence to happen the way you think it should be;
it will never be so. In what form it comes to you it doesn’t matter;
it comes to you in the form of a handicapped child; it comes to you
in the form of a ruined business; it comes to you in the form of death,
sickness - which way it comes it doesn’t matter but your demand is just this -
existence should happen according to your will. It will not happen that way. Hm?
[Questioner] How do you deal with it, if it doesn't go according to your will?
[Sadhguru] If the whole existence goes according to your will
[Questioner]...doesn't go according to your will!
[Sadhguru] No, suppose it goes according to your will
[inaudible]
Yes, the whole existence goes according to your will Seema, where should I go?
It should happen according to my will also, isn't it?
So some things happen your way; some thing happen my way.
Last few hundred years we have seen more
Sages, Gurus, Gods who are male.
What?
Who are male.
Why don't we see enough women in these roles?
There is no dearth for goddesses in this country there are more goddesses than gods if you do not know this.
if you go from village to village in Tamil, Nadu
For every village there is a different goddess
you know
But every village there's a different goddess but for every village there is no different. God
so
Goddesses there are more than gods in number, so your information is wrong if where you come from Delhi
You come from Delhi
Singapore or you should move to Tamil nadu
the lots of goddesses
all kinds of womens
about
sages and seers
There have been many in the past
these days
Because generally from young age.  They're trying to be beauty queens. They're just missing out on the other training.
Because the commercial campaign as to how a woman should be in
the world is totally misguided and westernized and
I think a huge amount of the female population is completely taken by this
Lot of them would approach it
maybe after their 50 and they have no hope of [being] beauty Queens and
At that time they make um a lot of them are coming to us
But there's a lot of young [women] also with us who are doing wonderfully well
so
Experientially there are many many [woman] among the isha meditators. Who are
really in Fabulous states
fabulous States of experience
So you can call them as seers or seersers
in their own ways
Gurus know women will not make good gurus
Nor will men make good gurus unless you know how to be beyond the two you can't be this
if you're a man or a woman if you're stuck with your gender
then there's no chance of being a guru because
You're looking at the mechanics of life in a completely different way, you just looking at life as life
Being Masculine feminine is only question of percentages
every other part that a woman has man also has except one or two parts isn't it so
Yes, or no
So the difference is very little you have given too much attention to reproductive organs
That this has become a big event in your head
if you if you just pay attention to life
You wouldn't be paying so much attention to reproductive organs, isn't it?
If you must identify it's not good to identify yourself with some body parts
Isn't it?
When you all the time go about I am a man, I am a woman
You are identifying yourself with body parts, isn't it?
if you must identify with Body parts I
Would advise at least choose the brains
Not these things which make you a man [or] a woman so women will not make good gurus
Men cannot do at all
So leave that area alone. Don't take men and women there. It doesn't work [like] that
You being a man [or] a woman is only for a few purposes in life. Yes
Only for a few purposes you need to be a woman or you need to be a man for rest of it
You just need to be a human being isn't it you just need to be your life here
All the time you're a woman all the time you're a man this is a disease
This is an ailment. This is not gender
This is a certain ailment in your head. It's not in the body. It's in the head
once
Your sexuality gets into your head
That's called perversion
If it's in the body, it's a natural process if it's in your head, it's a perversion
Where most people [is] gardening to their heads?
What does it matter to you?
What kind of body parts a guru has?
Easy useful to you or not. That's how the question is isn't it?
isn't it so
you you
(Questioner): Sadhguru, what is the difference between devotion and addiction?
In devotion also one is in a state where
he cannot live without his object of devotion.
So what is the difference?
Sadhguru: Addiction is usually to substances.
Devotion is towards something that you hold,
you can only be devout towards something that you hold way above yourself.
Devotion cannot be practiced.
It cannot be cultivated or cultured.
When you are overwhelmed by something or somebody
that you see something or somebody way above yourself,
far beyond yourself,
naturally devotion comes.
It’s very natural.
Addiction comes
because you taste something,
and you like the taste of it
or the experience of it.
You want to do it little more and little more and little more,
after some time you are trapped in it.
But a devotee looks more like an addict
than an addict.
An addict can hide his addiction.
A devotee cannot hide his devotion.
That’s his problem.
Even a drug addict,
if he has little bit of control over himself
he can make himself look very normal
and deceive the whole world,
but a devotee is not capable of that.
He just bursts forth anywhere;
he cannot hide it.
This question of devotion or addiction coming together,
they are not two opposites in any way
but they have come together
because both of them are sought
or both of them to some extent create
some very pleasant or ecstatic experience within the person
who is involved in it.
People get addicted to something because the experience is strong.
Otherwise who would get… did you get,
will you get addicted to the neem balls?
Ah, you got to do it consciously.
Everyday you have to think,
‘Should I do it?’
You have to decide ‘Ok, let me do it, one more day.’
You will never get addicted to the neem ball.
So, it’s safe.
If you do not know the benefits of the neem ball at least you know it’s safe.
It doesn’t entangle you.
So someone is getting addicted to something
because it is creating some pleasant experience for them.
People get addicted to tobacco,
people get addicted to coffee,
people get addicted to alcohol,
various kinds of drugs
because it’s creating some pleasant experience for them.
If it caused pain, if it put them off,
they wouldn’t get addicted to it.
So devotion and addiction are only connected on the level of experience,
nowhere else.
They are not at all
you should not even look at them together;
but in terms of experience, yes, they have a common ground.
Both of them create an extremely pleasant experience.
What devotion means is
your emotions have become sweet,
very sweet.
A devotee may look like a mad man to somebody else.
A devotee’s ways
The ways of a devotee may look utterly silly, illogical and stupid
for a thinking person.
For an intellectual person
the ways of the devotee look utterly foolish.
But you tell me,
you have this choice in your life –
in 24 hours of time,
if you can spend the 24 hours in utter pleasantness,
is that intelligence
or going through all kinds of turmoil in your mind,
which has nothing to do with the reality,
is that intelligence?
A devotee is very intelligent.
There is a deep life sense involved in it.
There is a very deep life sense,
a profound sense of life involved in it.
He has understood that ultimately the most important thing is,
if you make this experience of life extremely pleasant
24 hours of the day,
all the time through your life,
if you make the experience of you being here totally pleasant
then nothing will entangle you.
Everything will release you.
He has understood that.
It’s a very deep sense of intelligence.
It may not be logical.
It may look silly for an intellectual person,
but there is a very deep sense of intelligence involved.
And obviously this is a historical fact –
more devotees have attained
to the ultimate than any other way.
Devotion is always been the quickest and most successful way.
But only problem is they may look like nuts
to the rest of the society.
If you don’t mind looking like a nut,
or if you have realized you are one
whichever way
then there is no problem being a devotee.
devotees are fools who are not even thinking about their well-being.
But they don’t have to think about it because they found their well-being.
Only those who have not found it have to constantly think about well-being, isn’t it?
A devotee is well,
if he has to die tomorrow, he is still well.
That’s how he is.
So he has found his well-being,
so he doesn’t need to think about it.
He doesn’t feel the need to think about his well-being because he is well,
really well within himself.
So it’s a very very profound sense of life.
If this life sense is dissected
and analyzed it doesn’t make sense;
but in your experience it makes sense.
So devotion also causes ecstasy.
Today simple lumps of chemicals are also labeled ecstasy, you know?
Tablets are called ‘ecstasy.’
If there was a tablet,
if you popped it, for the rest of your life you are going to be ecstatic,
I’m not against it.
I’m ok with it.
What’s the problem?
I’m perfectly fine with a drug.
If there was a drug that you can take it and the rest of your life you are ecstatic,
what is the problem, let’s take it.
But the problem is it just gets you on a high for sometime and then dumps you
in such a bad way and in the process of doing this
it just ruins you completely.
That’s the problem.
If there were no side effects,
if you pop one pill and… or even one pill a day,
like vitamin, if you pop something,
an LSD or an ecstasy or whatever the names they have for it,
and for the whole day you are ecstatic and there is no damage to the body,
you will live well and your intelligence still functions, that’s important.
If your intelligence still functions
and it expands you and makes you enhanced in every way,
I don’t see what’s wrong with the drug.
But that’s not what the drug does.
It’s just that with the drug, with the addiction,
both the physicality and the mentality,
both the body and the mind shrinks.
The physical capabilities will shrink and
the mental capabilities will shrink.
So as a human being you are not enhanced,
you are destroyed.
But devotion makes you hugely enhanced.
Things that you never thought you could do,
now you can do
because there is no limitation on you.
A devotee is also insane with ecstasy
but he will never jump off a mountain
or he will never jump off a high rise building.
You know this happened to lots of people in United States during the 60’s;
people jumped off high rise buildings
because they were on LSD and they thought they are free and they could fly.
Devotee also feels like that but he will never jump off
because his mind and his body is in full function
because he is in such a state of pleasantness within himself.
So addiction shrinks you,
devotion enhances you.
Both of them could be pleasant experiences.
Addiction can give you moments of pleasantness.
Devotion gives you a constant sense of pleasantness,
but the most important thing is,
it enhances you, expands you,
makes you all inclusive.
Addiction pushes you to a corner,
makes you totally exclusive,
totally exclusive to a point
where after a period of addiction
most people become neurotic or
broken with anxieties or depression
because the mind is broken,
the body is broken.
So one enhances you,
another destroys you.
That’s the big difference.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: When you are a person of religion,
you’re given certain edicts
what is good, what is bad, the ten commandments,
the do’s and the don’ts,
but in ordinary life for most people,
particularly in the public domain,
to distinguish between good and bad seems to be increasingly difficult.
I’ve always held that there are two realms
the individual, individual gain and the second is the public good.
If one is clashing with the other,
if my personal gain is clashing with the public good,
then that is something bad;
if both are in harmony, then that is something good.
That seems to me a workable definition of
what is good and bad for ordinary interaction
between the citizen or individual and the community and the society.
What are your thoughts on that?
Sadhguru: See, once you start a debate
as to what is good and what is bad,
actually in reality this debate can go on forever
without coming to a conclusion.
Obviously you’ve debated this within yourself and around yourself
for many years and still there is no conclusion.
And believe me,
people have been debating this for thousands of years
and still there is no conclusion.
Why this is so is,
generally this starts from within the family;
that is people who have the authority within the family.
If you really carefully look at it,
essentially it boils down to this
‘What I do is good, what you do is bad.’
That extends to the society,
to politics to various things.
Whoever is in a position of power is in a position of dominance,
they may not spell it out so crudely
but in so many ways they’re telling you,
what I do is right, what you do is wrong.
So ultimately it becomes about whoever is in a state of advantage is right,
whoever is in a state of disadvantage is wrong.
Well,
that principle is the basis of all exploitation
and all the ugliness that you see on the planet.
So instead of starting a debate on what is good and what is bad,
I think what we need is
what is appropriate and what is inappropriate to our times,
to our society,
to our existence here,
to our level of economics.
What is right and
what is appropriate and what is inappropriate?
Now if… I’m just saying for example,
we are a rich nation because
if you have twenty nine rupees per day, you are rich in this country;
we are one rich nation.
Another rich nation is United States.
So between these two if you compare,
what may be right there, is not right here
because the conditions are not same.
People’s lives are not same,
culture is not same,
people’s emotions are not same,
people’s wants… likes and dislikes are not same.
So, what is right there may be completely wrong here.
What is right here may be completely wrong there.
So within the nation,
when we say a nation, we believe we are all Indians,
but here everybody has a opinion of his own.
it’ll be fanciful to think
there is one person here who doesn’t have an opinion of his own,
who goes by Indian constitution.
There is not one single person like that here.
Everybody has their own opinion,
their own twist of what is right and wrong, isn’t it?
One point two billion people!
Every one of them (Laughs) has their own opinions,
two people cannot agree as to what’s right and wrong.
So instead of looking at right and wrong,
if we start looking at what is appropriate;
okay these are our conditions,
this is our life,
what is the most appropriate thing to do right now?
Tomorrow if our conditions change,
the appropriateness changes.
Then there will be no clashes.
Constantly the clash between the previous generation and this generation,
between one human being and the other human being is
your ideas of right and his ideas of right are so different.
Parents and children are fighting,
administration and people are fighting,
management and union is fighting
simply because your ideas of good and bad are very different
and it's always different.
Within the family between the husband and the wife,
basic unit of the family,
their ideas of right and wrong are very different.
So, once you enter that space,
you’re entering into an endless controversy,
no possibility of a solution.
But if you look at appropriateness of action,
then we can arrive at what is the appropriate thing to do in our society,
for our conditions,
for our limitations.
(Sadhguru): So when we talk
when you use words of the
of whose meaning we do not know,
that’s called rubbish, isn't it?
But, maybe socially very valuable rubbish
because it confuses somebody.
If you can confuse a few people,
they may believe you’re intelligent.
Really!
If you want to be perceived as intellectual,
you just have to confuse a few people.
You don’t have to bring clarity to anybody.
The work
The spirituality or the spiritual work is about bringing clarity,
not confusion.
Confusion we do only when people have deep conclusions.
When people have conclusions in their mind
which they believe is everything,
then we confuse them a bit
so that their conclusions get loosened up.
Once Shankaran Pillai won the Meghalaya state lottery.
Is that still on?
Is it still on or gone?
Tch. No lottery?
Okay at that time, 1984.
We change the date, what’s the problem?
After all we made up the dates,
we can use it the way we want it, isn't it?
Not now,
1984
he won a lottery
and people gathered,
press gathered and everybody said,
‘Wow, you won a lottery!
Fifty six crores!’
You heard those days, isn't it?
‘So, how did you get this lucky number?’
So ShankaranPillai said,
‘I had
Three consecutive nights I had a dream.
In the dream it said,
‘Number eight, number eight, number eight three times.’
Three times it appeared
eight, eight eight. Then I thought
three times eight is thirty two and
I went for the thirty-two ticket and I got it!’
Then people said,
‘Well,three times eight is not thirty-two, it is twenty-four.’
He said, ‘What does it matter, I won the lottery!’
So I’m telling you,
Existence does not fit into your logic.
It’s not logically correct.
It’s not logically correct,
but it’s fantastic.
That means what’s wrong?
That means what’s wrong?
That means your logic is too limited, isn't it?
‘No, Existence is not correct,
why is it not fitting into my logic?’
This is the argument of a madman, isn't it?
This is the way it is.
If your logic doesn’t fit into it
there’s a problem with your head,
not with the Existence.
Sadhguru: Good evening.
Good evening, everyone.
Piyush Pandey: Good evening, Sadhguru.
Pranam.
So ladies and gentlemen, welcome to part two of
sadhu aur shaitaan (Referring to Hindi phrase – the ascetic and the devil) (Laughter).
We did the part one two years back
and I asked Pradeep Guha, the guy behind the advertising function,
I said, “You want me to speak to Sadhguru?
What do you want to call this session - sadhu aur shaitaan?”
But I think like Godfather One and Godfather Two,
we must have done quite well that I have been invited again (Laughter).
I’m very privileged that despite the kind of lifestyle I lead,
I always get an opportunity to spend one evening,
a little bit of time, with Sadhguru.
Maybe that prayer that he said was for me.
Sadhguru: Anyway, this is not a confession
(Laughter).
Piyush Pandey: So, my role today is to
get him to share things with you
and I… and my role is the same as yours as an audience.
I would love to hear a lot about what he has to say.
And I’ll try and ask questions, which are relevant to life
and have some relevance to your lives as retail professionals out here.
And some of you are fantastic,
your stories have been absolutely amazing today.
So let me start off, Sadhguru, by asking you that
you probably are the biggest multi-tasker that I have met in my life.
You are into sharing wonderful things with people –
millions of people –
and you find the time to play golf
and you ride the motorcycle like a champion,
you’re on a helicopter,
you do a lot of stuff in ecosystems with your Green Hands.
I don’t know what all you do.
How do you manage your time
because…?
Sadhguru: That last thing was not a good thing (Laughter).
“I don’t know what all you do” –
not a good thing (Both laugh).
Piyush Pandey: No, that is a sense of amazement (Laughter).
And there are people, who are very busy people,
and so we believe we are busy people.
We would like to know as to how you manage your time
and what is the kind of advice you would like to give us,
so that life beyond work is a lot more meaningful?
At least little more meaningful than what we lead,
a little closer to the kind of meaningful life that you lead.
(Sadhguru): From what I observe from people,
as I travel more and more,
meet various kinds of people
in business, academics, science
and regular people all over the world,
what I see is
most people, in the twenty-four hours that we have per day,
they are more preoccupied than busy.
That is, their own thoughts and their own emotions are such a big issue,
that most of their time is spent dealing with that.
They may be working
but in their work,
a lot of struggles are within themselves.
If you are in any kind of sport or any creativity,
you would know that a little struggle means
your ball will go somewhere else,
your ragam, talam will go somewhere else,
your painting will go somewhere else,
nothing will happen properly.
Or in other words, what could happen very simply,
unfortunately happens with lots of difficulty.
This is mainly because
they have been given a phenomenal gadget
or a phenomenal machine,
which is the human mechanism,
above all a phenomenal dimension called the mind.
They are trying to operate this phenomenal machine, or a gadget,
or a computer, if you would (Laughs) like to call it,
without reading the user’s manual.
Every day, struggling with their own stuff.
And it doesn’t get solved before they are twenty or something.
Till their last day (Laughs), on their deathbed,
they are still struggling with the same things –
their thoughts and their emotions.
If they learn to sort this out very early in their life,
I’m sure they can work half the number of hours that they’re working
and be a lot more productive than the way they are right now.
My effort is to bring this possibility to people’s lives,
that you can live life with ease,
not with struggle.
One thing is,
when we say work,
it's… Many young people, wonderful people,
who are getting recognized for whatever wonderful things they have done.
Leaving them apart, but generally,
work means always been
people have been taught that they must work hard.
Nobody told them they must work joyfully.
Nobody told them their work should be an expression of their joy or their love.
They have to work hard.
If you work hard, life will be tedious.
How else will it be?
You will do something hard only because you don’t know how to do it.
If you know how to do it,
you would do… do it with ease (Laughs).
So without learning how to do something, if you try to do it,
without investing enough time in perception,
if life is all expression,
then life becomes a big struggle.
Most people are not doing anything except earning a living,
maybe reproducing and dying one day (Laughs) -
nothing more (Laughs).
They may believe they are doing many things
but this is all they’re doing -
eating, sleeping, reproducing, dying one day.
That is such a big fuss.
Every other creature is able to do this.
From an earthworm, to an insect,
to anything and anything,
everybody is doing this.
They all earn their own living.
They eat, they sleep, they reproduce and they die.
With one-millionth of our brain, they’re able to do it.
With this big brain, human beings are struggling –
not with the things that they’re doing,
they’re struggling with the brain itself.
Their own intelligence has become a serious problem.
What is the biggest boon in our life,
what is the greatest benefaction in our life,
which is our intelligence,
this has become a problem because
they don’t know how to hold it,
they don’t know how to use it.
Constantly, it works against themselves.
When I say it works against you,
people may call all kinds of names,
may use all kinds of words to describe this.
They may call it stress,
they may call it tension,
they may call it misery,
they may call it depression,
they may call it anxiety,
they may call it madness.
Essentially, it's your intelligence turned against you.
Your intelligence is not working for you,
it's working against you.
So my fundamental work is this,
that at least your body and your mind should work for you.
Nobody else may work for you, it doesn’t matter (Laughs).
At least your body and your intelligence must work for you.
If this one thing happens,
you living blissfully, gracefully, effectively is a natural consequence.
Piyush Pandey: One of the other things,
which I found very important to us as a society,
as a country,
which came up when Nagesh was speaking earlier,
just before you came in,
that in our society,
there is a bias towards skill
against skill.
We try and believe that being a babu in a railway station (Sadhguru laughs) is probably a better job
than being a retail employee.
And Nagesh said that
some of the people think that
the moment a girl’s father gets to know that the prospective boy works in a shop,
he says,
“Humko to ladki nahi milti hai” (Referring to Hindi phrase – we don’t find a bride).
There is a bias against skill and to
Sadhguru: Because usually, the father believes
he is supposed to catch a customer (Both laugh).
Piyush Pandey: So
Sadhguru: In retail business means
you have maximum contact with customers,
so you’re supposed to find your bride.
You shouldn’t bother your father (Both laugh).
Piyush Pandey: Yeah, they find a lot of (Laughter/Applause)
They always find
These people find the girls (Sadhguru laughs)
but the girl’s father doesn’t want to give the girl to them,
that’s the problem (Laughter).
I think that’s a huge need of the country at this point of time
and I heard that the Principal Secretary of Skills of Maharashtra is here (Sadhguru laughs),
people are here.
I think there are two things that come to my mind –
one is the way society looks at skills,
in a bit derogatory fashion,
and two is the self-respect of a skilled worker.
I personally believe that
if you are confident about yourself,
the world will change itself.
I would like you to comment on this
because it's very relevant to some very hardworking people here
that they get the respect in society
and they learn to self-respect themselves in the years ahead of us.
Sadhguru: The world respecting you is the quality of the world around you.
If they are that kind, they will respect you (Laughs).
But I know a lot has been said about this,
but you respecting yourself I think is a little crazy.
Respect is between two people.
But I’m asking anybody here, isn’t respect between two people,
that you respect somebody for who they are?
“I respect myself” –
you must be mad
because these things
Like this is a big thing you know,
in America, people are saying… All these days they used to say, “I believe in god”,
now they say, “‘I believe in myself” (Both laugh).
All these days they used to say, “I love you” to somebody.
These days they have started, “I love myself.”
See, to love,
to believe,
to respect,
you need two.
If you have become two within yourself,
for sure you’re heading for madness
because an individual means you’re not further divisible.
If you become two within yourself,
then you’re working towards madness.
You’re working hard and you may succeed (Laughter).
If you really become two, then we say you’re schizophrenic, isn't it?
So this has been worked in so many different ways –
by religious people,
by new-age philosophers, all kinds.
“I love myself,
I respect myself,
I believe in myself,
me and my ego,
me and my soul” –
all kinds of things.
I’m asking you, all of you –
within your body, are you one person or two people?
Please make up your mind right now.
One or two? Hello?
Participants: One.
Sadhguru: That means you’re healthy (Few laugh).
If you are two, either you are schizophrenic or you’re possessed.
You need either a psychiatrist or an exorcist (Laughter), isn’t it (Both laugh)?
So, this self-respect business has to go because
this will lead to all kinds of expectations.
I respect myself.
I think I’m a big guy,
now I expect you also to treat me like that.
When you don’t, I will become resentful,
angry, all kinds of things.
There is no need for me to respect myself.
But if I respect somebody,
it may not even be because of their quality.
It is a… Because of my quality, I respect somebody, isn't it?
See, you looking up to something
not necessarily mean that that person is in a fantastic place.
It is just that you’re in a place of learning,
you’re in a place of moving upward in your life,
so you’re looking up.
You’re looking up to something means you’re moving upward.
If you’re looking down upon something means you’re moving downward, isn't it?
So, respect is between two people.
I don’t see how it is applicable.
“Within myself, I respect myself,
I believe myself,
I love myself” –
these are all statements of the insane.
But unfortunately, it's spread across the world,
it's becoming the fashion of the day.
I’m sorry (Laughs).
Piyush Pandey: I’ll make it a little more focused towards the people out here.
I completely understand what you’re saying,
but if somebody feels that he’s putting in a lot of effort
and his efforts are not being recognized,
how does that person motivate himself or herself to say,
“I don’t really give a damn as to what other people think.
I have to keep on doing what I’m doing.
I have to excel myself every day”?
What is the message that you would like to give people,
who feel that sometimes their efforts do not get recognized
to the level that they think they have put in?
Sadhguru: See these are two extremes.
“I don’t give a damn” is not going to work,
especially if you’re in the retail (Laughs).
If you say, “I don’t give a damn”, you’re out of business.
At the same time,
thinking “my efforts are not giving the necessary result” -
I think a whole lot of people feel this way.
I’m saying, in your assessment, you may be doing great,
but the world has to recognize too.
Somebody else has to see value to what you’re doing,
only then it’ll find recognition.
If you feel it's valuable, you’re doing it,
then don’t bother about other people’s recognition.
But if what you’re doing is useful to them
Let's understand this –
not because what you’re doing is great,
because what you’re doing is useful to them,
they will say, “Oh, this is wonderful.”
So, “I don’t give a damn” definitely doesn’t work.
But whether other people recognize you or not,
depending upon how useful it is at a given time to people.
That depends what is the type of job we’ve taken up.
Now… I must say this (Laughs).
Shall I (Laughs)?
See,
today, wherever I go,
people are saying things, “Oh, he is a yogi, he is a mystic.”
They don’t know a damn thing about me being a yogi or a mystic, okay (Both laugh)?
They don’t know what is a yogi, what is a mystic.
Now, because it's internationally recognized,
everybody is clapping their hands (Piyush Pandey laughs).
I’ve been saying the same things for last thirty-five years.
Nobody thought anything about it.
Now, somewhere else in America, people are clapping their hands,
here also they started clapping their hands, okay (Laughs).
It means nothing to me,
all the recognition.
Someday if people truly recognize what is being a yogi
and they’re inspired to become that,
that’s wonderful.
Of course, there are many people, who are inspired by that (Applause).
Today, because it's internationally recognized, everybody is saying,
“This is… He is a great yogi.”
They don’t know what a damn
what is damn yogi is about.
They don’t know a damn thing about it.
It is just that many people see it's useful to them,
so there is recognition.
Let's understand this –
people are not recognizing the quality of who I am,
they are recognizing the usefulness that I am to them.
Only that part gets recognition.
The quality of what I am, only a handful of people would recognize that.
Rest will not even know what the hell it is (Laughs)
and it's okay (Laughs).
Piyush Pandey: I think that’s beautifully said and I think
if I was to translate that into our language out here in this room
Sadhguru: Hey, don’t use your language, hmm (Laughter).
Piyush Pandey: My language of the kind that I can use in front of you (Laughter).
I would say that,
keep at it as to what you’re doing.
One day, people will see the use of that in their lives.
And your time will come, like his time came when people started clapping.
So all you retail professionals,
don’t worry about what the world thinks,
keep on doing what you’re doing.
Am I right in saying that?
Sadhguru: Oh, that’s… that’s a deduction (Laughs) (Applause).
I would say that if your
if your work is an expression of your joyfulness,
whether recognition or no recognition, what does it matter?
You’re finding an opportunity to express your joy.
And if you look at your own lives and see –
the moments where… where you’re in pursuit of your happiness,
what is the quality of those moments,
the moments when you’re expressing your joy, what is the quality of those moments, if you see,
you will see whenever you’re expressing your happiness or joy,
they are the best moments in your life.
If your work is an expression of your joy,
your working moments will be the best moments of your life.
Piyush Pandey: And the girls will come to you anyway.
Sadhguru: Anyway, as a customer at least, she will come
because… because ladies do most of the shopping (Laughter),
they will anyway come.
How you convert it is up to you
Piyush Pandey: So the onus is on you guys.
Sadhguru: But most of the salespersons are girls these days
Piyush Pandey: I know.
They don’t have any such problem Okay,
now, little difficult one.
Sadhguru: For you or me
Piyush Pandey: We’ll figure that out.
For me, it's always difficult speaking to you,
so I’m trying to make it slightly difficult for you.
Now this is about loyalties and beliefs.
A lot of these people work in huge outlets,
How do you handle loyalties and beliefs?
Sadhguru: A salesperson should have no loyalty to any product
He has no business.
It's the customer’s business to be loyal to a product.
A salesperson, why should he be loyal to any product?
He should sell whatever sells well, right (Laughter/Applause)?
Piyush Pandey: His
Sadhguru: You’re trying to… No, no
Piyush Pandey: His job is to sell things that are not selling well.
Sadhguru: No, the question is,
are you trying to run a business
or are you trying to propagate a philosophy?
Piyush Pandey: Most businesses today say that we don’t sell a product,
we sell philosophies (Laughter).
Like certain soaps are not supposed to be soaps,
they are
Sadhguru: Oh! Okay.
Piyush Pandey: …a self-expression of people .
Sadhguru: I must tell you
when you’re a salesperson, it is not for you to judge
which customer is smart,
which customer is stupid, okay?
Only you can be smart or stupid.
Customer has the right –
it's his money,
he can choose to buy whatever the hell he wants.
It's not your business to judge,
“Oh, this is a stupid customer,
this is a smart customer” -
no.
You’re smart or stupid is the only question.
Customer is the king because it's his money.
He can buy whatever the hell he wants.
It's nobody’s business,
it's his money .
Piyush Pandey: So in today’s day and scenario, what is it that service…?
As you said earlier, it is what the other person thinks of you,
not what you think of yourself.
What is it that you would like to share with the people out here
about the role of service
and equate it to the meaning of service in our lives?
Sadhguru: about this service business –
see, we need to understand this.
In our lives, we do many things.
When we do many things,
we find in certain areas of life,
the more opportunity we get to do something,
more privileged we feel.
In certain other places,
we think whatever little we do, we’re doing too much.
When we
When do we feel that we’re doing too much for somebody?
When we have no love for them of any kind.
Our heart is barren,
then if I lift a pin for you, I feel I’ve done too much for you already
because I’ve done great service for you,
taking… picking this up and giving it to you.
But if I have love for you –
not as love for you or love for somebody else,
simply that
See, we need to understand this – certain pleasantness of your emotion is love.
If you hold yourself in a certain pleasantness of emotion and you’re loving –
not just to this or that,
you’re just loving –
then you will see you’re willing to do as much as you can do.
Of course, there are limits to our physical ability to do things,
but whatever I can do, I will do.
In anybody’s life, this is all there is.
In our lives, if we do not do what we cannot do, there is no problem.
But in our lives, if we do not do what we can do, we are a disastrous life.
So, first of all bringing ourselves to a place within ourselves
that we ourselves will not be a restriction
to our own ability to do things in the world –
this is only possible
when you have love for everything around you.
Love is not about somebody, first of all.
Love is the way you are.
When you are loving
As you are happy, you can be loving.
Pleasantness of the mind may be called joy.
Pleasantness of the heart may be called love.
So if you are loving,
then doing whatever you can do in a given moment is natural.
If you do do that,
will the customer stay with you?
Of course.
But this is not a trick.
I was (Laughs)
We… We were conducting a program for the top twenty-five executives of Microsoft.
There were twenty-five of them, two-day event
and I have nine volunteers.
Our volunteers are always on their toes, doing everything possible that they can do.
And these people just look at them and say,
“Sadhguru, where do you get such people?”
You know, they are always looking for attrition (Laughs).
I say, “No, you don’t get such people,
you got to make them.”
“How do we make them?”
I said, “You have to make them fall in love with you.”
“How do we make them fall in love with… (Audio cut)?”
I said, “First you have to fall in love with them.”
They said, “Oh, they don’t pay us for that” (Laughs).
So, in this context, if you work,
now work will be a pain.
On the surface, something else,
your remunerations or recognitions may keep you going,
but it will suck the life out of you.
But if your work is an expression of who you are,
if your work is an expression of your joy and your love in your life,
you don’t have to worry about service.
Service exists only where the heart is barren.
If your heart is full for everything that comes in front of you,
you will do your best.
When you do your best, things will happen, both for him and for you.
Above all, your life will get enriched with work.
Activity will enrich you.
Activity will not drain you.
All of us in Isha Foundation (Laughs)
I have all driven them
I have driven all of them into this kind of madness.
Every day is twenty hours a day,
seven days of the week,
three-hundred-and-sixty-five days.
Today, a few 1000 people have gotten into this state.
All of them are on, seven days of the week.
People think these people are… What,
are they possessed with something?
But joyfully, they’ll go around and do.
See, it's not even twenty-four hours since I landed from United States.
Already I have finished two events and come (Laughs)
and I’m traveling to Delhi today evening.
So, people ask, “Are you trying to kill yourself?”
Anyway you’re going to die.
Are you going to die of exhaustion or boredom (Laughter)?
I don’t want to die of boredom for sure.
That’s decided.
I may die of exhaustion but that’s okay.
At least you’re doing what you really care to do.
In your life, if you’re constantly creating what you care to create,
then you find
you don’t have to do any service.
If I ask all of you – doesn’t matter retail or wholesale you are (Laughs) –
for yourself and for everybody around you,
what is it that you want to create?
To create a peaceful you,
a joyful you,
a loving you is what you’re looking for, isn't it?
You’re trying to achieve it in so many different ways.
Pleasantness within yourself, is it not very important?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You want to be a pleasant life.
What is it that you want from your life?
You want your experience of life to be as pleasant as possible.
You may call it peace,
you may call it joy,
you may call it pleasure,
you may call it health,
you may call it love,
you may call it ecstasy.
It doesn’t matter what you call it,
essentially, different levels of pleasantness.
If you try to create outside pleasantness, that’s called success
if you succeed in having that.
Otherwise, pleasantness in your experience of life.
If your… If you create this for yourself,
that if you sit here, you are hundred percent pleasant within you
When you are feeling wonderful,
if I meet you – any one of you –
I’m sure you are a wonderful human being.
But when you are feeling nasty,
when you’re feeling miserable,
when you’re feeling frustrated,
if I meet you, you could be a nasty human being.
Yes or no?
Is this not true for every human being?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So instead of doing service and sacrifice
and all kinds of terrible things in this life,
if you keep this
this piece of life (Referring to oneself) in a very pleasant condition,
you will always be pleasant to everything and everybody around you.
There is no effort in this.
The only effort you have to do is
to figure out within this (Referring to oneself),
how to keep this pleasant –
little sadhana to keep this one pleasant.
If you keep this (Referring to oneself) pleasant,
every act, every thought, every emotion that you generate will naturally be pleasant.
Yes or no?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If I meet you when you’re very happy,
are you not a wonderful, wonderful human being?
Almost twenty percent of our time, resource and energy has been spent in the prisons,
both in India and outside.
If you look at this
the history sheets of these people –
normally we’re working with long-term prisoners –
they have done terrible things in their life.
I know them very well now (Laughs).
If you let all of them out tomorrow morning,
at least fifty percent of the people will do the same things again.
They’re not by intention, many of them,
by compulsion they’ll do the same things.
But when they are with me, they are most wonderful people, okay.
They are very exuberant, joyful, highly spirited, wonderful guys (Laughs)
because I just keep them happy when they’re with me.
This is true with every human being.
Unfortunately, in this world,
we’ve always been trying to produce good people,
which is a serious mistake.
Good people have done terrible things on this planet.
The more good they think they are,
more terrible things they have done to other people.
But a joyful person very rarely does anything harmful to somebody else
because it doesn’t occur to him.
He is not trying to be good, he’s just feeling wonderful.
Naturally, he will do wonderful things to people.
We have to invest in producing joyful and sensible human beings on the planet,
not good people,
because the more good they are,
the more they are in conflict with everything else.
Please see, where is the conflict?
The more good you think you are, the more fighting you are.
We don’t need good people, we can send them to heaven.
But on this planet we need joyful people (Applause),
we need sensible people (Laughs).
Piyush Pandey: That’s… That’s really wonderful.
I think I would have asked you the last question from me about leadership,
but I think that you answered a lot of things.
If people read between the lines,
you answered a lot of questions about leadership anyway.
But if you would like,
how do you inspire your people
because they are the leaders of tomorrow.
The more we
Sadhguru: They’re already my leaders (Laughs).
Piyush Pandey: The more we have, the better off we’ll be.
Any tips that you would like to share (Sadhguru laughs) with the people out here
as to how
how a team is made from beyond being a great individual player?
Even a Brian Lara couldn’t win for West Indies,
you need eleven good people to win a match.
So, anything that you would like to share
Sadhguru: India,
in my perception,
is a tremendous talent pool.
This is not
I’m not speaking this out of my nationalistic fervor (Laughs).
I’m not so identified with the political identity of a nation as such.
But what I see is,
having spoken to all kinds of people across the world –
you know, I have spoken in large universities,
scientific community, which have very keen minds,
academics and others
but on an average, if you pick up a bunch of hundred people
off the streets of Mumbai, or Bangalore, or Chennai, or somewhere,
you will find generally they are of a higher intellect
than what you can pick up anywhere in the world, believe me.
I’m not saying this because I’m an Indian.
Generally, natural intellect is very high
but it is one of the most disorganized intellects.
They have intelligence but organization has not happened,
which essentially means lack of leadership.
There has not been an inspiring leadership for a long time.
We get leaders only when there is super crisis.
We don’t get leaders to manage our well-being and enhance our well-being.
Only when we’re in a real deep pit
like Mahatma Gandhi is born
because we are in a total mess.
Somebody else has occupied us and everything bad has been done to us,
now one leader props up out of desperation.
Otherwise, to be a leader,
naturally to stand up and be a leader,
to create good things,
to maintain good things
and to enhance good things in the world,
we… I… when I look back, I have not seen a leader like that
for a long time in the history of this country.
I think this is mainly… has many things to… many
there are many factors to this.
I think one main factor is we have been an occupied nation for too long
and somehow we have developed this attitude –
“Don’t put your head up, somehow put it down and go home.”
“Don’t confront problems, avoid problems”
has been our attitude always.
I think even today, mothers are teaching their children –
“If there’s any problem on the street, just put your head down and come home.
Don’t try to fix it, that’s not your problem.”
Essentially, a leader means in some way you’re willing to confront problems.
You’re willing to seek out problems and possible problems
and fix them before they happen.
But that attitude has not been there,
so we’ve not built leadership.
And also, being an occupied nation, we did not build many layers of leadership.
If a good leader comes up there, everybody will start worshipping him.
A leader does not need worship.
He needs many tiers of leadership
for him to find traction and do something meaningful.
If leadership has to find expression in the world,
or in a nation, or in a state, or in an industry, or whatever,
you need many tiers of leadership.
But in our society, generally when a good leader comes up,
we will see worship.
Somebody will start building temples for him,
somebody will start doing pooja for him,
all these things start happening.
We have to shift from this attitude.
Looking up to a leader for inspiration is good
but losing all sense about him is not good.
So, what is needed in this country is
to develop those many tiers of leadership.
This is in… Somewhere in 2004,
that someone was at our Yoga Center,
a very prominent person in the country,
and he asked me,
“Sadhguru, this is great what you’re doing but what about the nation?”
I said,
“See, I have a list of 2000 people,
who will make a difference for this country, if we impact them.
Get me these 2000 people in the next four years.
You will see a quiet change will happen in the nation.”
I am not talking about Prime Ministers, Chief Ministers
because generally their tenure is five years and they’re gone.
But there’s another set of leaders in the society,
who may be business leaders,
who may be bureaucratic leaders and social leaders of various kinds,
who have a solid twenty-five to thirty years to impact.
Because if you’re thinking of any kind of serious impact,
you have to think at least twenty-five years at a time,
otherwise nothing significant can be done.
So we’ve been trying to reach them and touch them.
Now I can say about forty-two percent of these 2000 people across the country
we have touched.
They are bringing about a quiet silent revolution (Applause).
Because in my perception,
a revolution is not about “I want you to change.”
This’s not a revolution,
this is a problem.
This is the basis of all problems –
“I want you to change.”
“I’m willing to change” – this is a revolution.
To bring this forth in everybody –
“Whatever is needed for the situation,
I am willing to change myself and do my best in this given situation” –
this is a revolution.
This is the revolution we need in this country right now
because everybody is stuck to their own mindsets,
their own castes,
their own creeds,
their own whatever different kinds of things.
Everybody is an activist for his own causes.
There is no bloody cause, which is good enough in this world,
except human well-being.
There is no other cause which is worthy of human attention.
If we don’t dedicate ourselves to that
If we dedicate ourselves to that,
everyone in some way will become a leader.
If your fundamental thing when you step out of your home,
if your thing is,
“Today, wherever possible, whichever way possible,
I will impact as many people as possible…”
What I’m saying is,
let's say you come in touch with ten people.
If ten people come your way today,
you can either impact them positively, or negatively,
or you can let it pass by.
Whatever the nature of your job,
whether you are just a salesperson,
sales manager,
manager,
whatever you are up there,
even if you’re a beggar on the street –
you know, beggar has the maximum number of clients per day (Both laugh) –
it doesn’t matter who you are,
I have seen beggars who are positively impacting anybody, who comes to them.
They’re saying the right things.
I’m saying in every possible way,
either you can positively impact somebody,
negatively impact somebody or let it pass.
So according to one’s capacity to do things,
depending upon one’s intelligence, competence, capability
and the position that we hold at a given moment,
our impact may be small or big but we can impact.
If we exercise this right,
if we exercise this choice every moment of our life,
wherever you are,
you always impact whoever comes in touch with you,
you will positively impact them in whatever way possible,
you are a leader.
How far you will go?
Let us see the competence and then you know
Suppose you are an IT engineer.
You have information technology ideas 1000 years ago, all right?
Maybe you would remain unemployed right through your life
but you could still impact people (Laughs).
I’m saying the time also decides
how impactful we are at a given time in history.
But the important thing is that you take up this responsibility –
whoever comes in front of you,
you will in somehow make a positive impact on their life.
If you start doing this, you are a leader.
Whether… What capacity you function in depends on variety of things.
That will anyway arrange itself over a period of time.
Piyush Pandey: Thank you.
Questioner: Pranam Sadhguru.
you’ve been saying this for a while and I’ve been listening to you for a long time
the “I” is more powerful than the iPhone. Yeah?
And the iPhone in the box comes with a user’s manual.
Sadhguru: No, that depends whether you are using the iPhone
or iPhone is using you up.
Questioner: Yeah, sure (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Depending on that (Laughs).
Questioner: And you’ve also said lot of times that,
“You’ve not read the user’s manual.”
So where is the human being’s user manual?
Because the iPhone comes with the user manual in the book… in the box
and how do you find our… my user manual
or the human being’s user manual (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: So, please don’t go and browse through the bookstores,
it's not there.
See, when you say “me” or “I”
you may have many ideas about what is “me”.
But essentially,
whatever ideas and ideologies you might have developed around you,
essentially you are a piece of life.
Yes?
Yes or no?
None of you’re saying anything?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Are you life or are you something?
Now I’m having doubts (Piyush Pandey laughs).
Are you life?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Show me that you’re life. (Pause)
Not like that (Few laugh),
make some lively sounds (Applause).
Okay, okay. Oh, that’s life.
So you are life.
You may be identified with many things,
starting from your body.
Because you’re identified your body,
you’re a gender.
Because you’re identified with your education, you become something else.
You identify with your religion, you become something else.
Like this, you go on multiplying your identities many different ways.
That may be a social requirement.
To function in the society, you take on something, that’s fine.
But fundamentally, you’re life.
If you want to know life,
if you think the user’s manual is some scripture that you have
somebody has written, it can't be
because what you’re seeking to know is the nature of this one (Referring to oneself).
Because you are life,
you don’t have to read another one,
you have to pay attention to this one (Referring to oneself).
Now, you pay attention to everything else,
but not enough to this one (Referring to oneself).
When I say “paying attention to this one”,
this is not about standing in front of the mirror
and paying attention to this.
Really paying attention to something fundamentally this
because even your body you acquired from outside, isn't it?
Hmm?
It's the food that you have eaten.
What you call as my mind
The content of your body and the content of your mind –
this (Gestures) is the food that you have eaten,
this (Gestures) is the impressions that you have taken in.
But more fundamental than that, you still exist.
So, if what you wo… what you want to know is life and you are life,
all you have to do is delve deeper into your experience
and the user’s manual is right there.
And life is not something that you use,
life is something that you allow it to blossom and flourish.
You don’t have to use this life (Referring to oneself).
There’s nothing like that.
You just have to allow it to blossom to its fullest possibility.
If it blossoms,
then it will do the best possible things.
See, every life on this planet –
whether it is a worm, or an insect, or a bird, or a tree –
every one of them is trying to become a full-fledged life, isn't it?
A mango tree is not trying to become a coconut tree.
I’m sorry to mention mangoes a little early in the season, hmm?
But a mango tree is aspiring to become a full-fledged mango tree.
But we know what is a full-fledged earthworm,
we know what is a full-fledged grasshopper,
we know what is a full-fledged tree,
but we do not know what is a full-fledged human being,
because whatever you become in your life,
you will notice that you would want to be something more.
If that something more happens,
you want to be something more.
If that something happens, you want to be something more.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Wherever you are right now in your life,
you still want to be something more.
If you really look at this,
you will see what you want is a limitless expansion.
You are not looking for this much or that much,
you are looking for an infinite expansion.
If you are looking for an infinite expansion,
how do you get there?
You are looking for infinite expansion through physical means.
This is never going to be fulfilled because
physical means it has a defined boundary.
The fundamentals of physicality is,
it must have a defined boundary.
If there is no boundary, you cannot call it physical anymore.
Right now, there is something within you
longing for an infinite expansion,
but you’re trying to give it physical means.
How you’re longing to find expansion
is finding expression is –
if it finds a very basic physical expression, we call this sexuality.
Something that is not you, you want to make that a part of yourself,
that’s the effort.
If it finds an emotional expression, we will call that love
because something that is not you, you are trying to wrap it with your emotions
and make it a part of yourself.
If it finds a mental expression,
it gets labeled as greed, ambition, conquest or simply shopping.
Of course, you’re not against that (Laughs).
All these are the same effort that a human being is trying to be something more
than what they are right now.
But all of you have lived long enough to know
more is not going to settle you,
you want all of it.
Even if I make you the king or queen of this planet,
still you will look at the remaining galaxies. Yes or no?
Because that’s the nature of the human being.
This (Referring to oneself) will not settle for this much and that much.
If you want, you can go in installments.
But approaching the infinite through installments,
I think is a stupid way to go,
because you can't count one, two, three, four, five
and say one day infinite.
You can only become endless counting.
So, the manual is right here (Referring to oneself).
Don’t believe me,
don’t believe anything that anybody says,
but pay attention to the life that you are.
Not your thought,
not your emotion,
not your physical structure,
but the fundamental life that you are –
if you pay enough attention to that,
everything you want to know about life is right here.
You don’t have to listen to anybody’s discourses,
you don’t have to read anybody’s scriptures,
you don’t have to listen to anybody’s teachings
because what you know about
what you need to know about life is yours fundamentally because
you are life.
If you were not life,
then you will have to do graduation about life,
then you have to do Masters about life,
then you have to do research about life.
But you are life.
Are you?
You’re not accepting this.
Are you?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Are you hundred percent life (Piyush Pandey laughs)?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you are life,
no study needed about it.
You just have to
You’re too identified with other things,
accessories of life.
You are so identified with accessories of life,
what you are has not come into your perspective.
You carry the accessories to the extent you want,
to the extent you need.
Anything more if you carry, your life will become distorted and ugly.
But fundamentally, your life,
what is the quality of this life (Referring to oneself),
have you allowed it to blossom
or have you kept it constipated –
that’s a question.
If it blossoms, it… it reads it to you
Questioner: Pranam Sadhguru, here.
Sadhguru: Oh, okay.
Questioner: Sir, I listened to what you’ve just said,
that you are life and the manual is inside you.
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no, don’t listen to me.
I’m asking you, are you life?
Questioner: Absolutely and I understand that and I
Sadhguru: No, no, are you agreeving it
Are you agreeing with me or
are you really life?
Questioner: I am life.
Sadhguru: Okay, then you’re fine
because I don’t… I’m not used to talking to dead people you see (Laughter).
Questioner: The question here is, to get to the ultimate goal,
the importance of a guru -
in the real sense of the word –
is that absolutely critical or can you find it on your own?
Sadhguru: Tch… To
If you want to walk an uncharted terrain,
a terrain that you’re not familiar with,
it's
it's good to take the help of a person, who’s already walked the terrain.
It's just sensible, that’s all.
Every year, we trek in the Himalayas.
I have been trekking… For over thirty-five, almost forty years,
I’ve been trekking in the Himalayas.
Now for eleven, twelve years, I’ve been trekking in Tibet.
But when I’m in the mountains,
this illiterate mountain guy,
one Sherpa or somebody, he simply says like this (Gestures).
Go like that.
In my mind, I think maybe this is better.
But he says this, I go that way.
He says that, I go that way.
It's because it's just sensible.
Sometimes, I may know little better than him on a few things.
But still it's better (Laughs) to follow him there
because one mistake if you make,
it’ll take days to correct that mistake
and it's very expensive.
Sometimes, it could be life (Laughs).
So when you’re walking an uncharted terrain,
a terrain that you’re not familiar with,
it is sensible to take guidance.
This thing about,
“Do I need a guru?
Can't I do it myself?” –
of course you can do it by yourself.
It is just that to find something that is next door,
you may go around the world and come back.
This happened.
Someone came looking for Isha Yoga Center, near Coimbatore.
They came to a local village
and they asked one village boy there,
“How far is Isha Yoga Center?”
The boy said, “Well, it's 24,996 miles.”
They said, “What? That far?”
He said, “Yeah, the way you’re going.
If you turn around, it’s four miles” (Few laugh/Applaud).
So, you may be very qualified with something else.
When it comes to a certain aspect of life,
you talk to people,
who have walked the terrain before you,
that’s all it is.
Because it's a completely uncharted terrain largely,
because it's an inward terrain,
you seek help. Otherwise,
what is right here, you may take a lifetime.
The intent is
that you find it today or as quickly as possible
and enjoy the fruit of that for the rest of your life.
But most people think (Laughs)
their spiritual seeking should happen at the end of their life.
That’s unfortunate.
Knowing this piece of life (Referring to oneself)
in its entirety,
should it happen at the beginning of your life or the end of your life?
Hmm?
Participants: Beginning.
Sadhguru: Life should begin with spiritual process.
Do not think spiritual process means
looking up, looking down,
going to the temple.
No, this is not what it is,
it's about turning inward.
This is about knowing this piece of life (Referring to oneself) absolutely.
Even you… I mean, he was talking about the phone.
Even if you have to use a simple gadget like a phone,
the more you know about it, the better you can use it.
Is it so?
Is it so?
Why is that not true with this (Referring to oneself)?
This is all self-realization means.
Let me put… make it very simple.
If you know everything that you need to know about this (Referring to oneself),
that means you’re self-realized.
You know it in only parts, so you use it only in parts.
If you know everything about this (Referring to oneself),
you can use it in a phenomenal way.
In a truly phenomenal way, you can use this (Referring to oneself).
And this should happen at the earliest possible time in your life,
not on your deathbed (Applause).
Piyush Pandey: Right.
We’ll call it a day?
Sadhguru, as always, thank you so much, Sir,
from… on behalf of all of us here
and pranam (Applause).
Participant:Swamiji, can you explain what is life?
How can we avoid angry?
Sadhguru: I am sorry, what is?
Participant: Explain what is life?
Sadhguru: What is life?
Participant: Yeah!
Sadhguru: Oh! (Laughs)
And what is the second part of it?
Participant: How can you avoid angry?
Sadhguru:How can you avoid anger?
See, if you are driving on the Coimbatore streets,
if you’re driving on the Coimbatore street,
you have to avoid the medians which are placed in odd places,
you have to avoid bad drivers,
you have to avoid drunken men crossing the street,
children crossing the street,
all kinds of things.
But when you’re driving on Coimbatore street,
do you have to avoid the moon?
I am asking you?
Do you have to avoid the moon?
No!
Because the moon is not on the street. Isn't it?
So, similarly, right now, are you angry?
No?
Then why should you avoid it?
There is no need to avoid it.
It is just that, you think anger is an entity.
Anger is not an entity - you become angry.
You become angry,
anger is not sitting somewhere and you go hit it.
There is no such thing.
You become angry.
When you become angry,
is it pleasant for you, or unpleasant for you?
Unpleasant for you
Unpleasant for others for sure,
unpleasant for yourself also.
Today, medical science proves to you,
when you are angry, you are actually poisoning your system.
You know?
We’ve always known this,
but today chemical tests clearly show you,
that you are actually poisoning your system,
generating poison in the system by being angry.
So, why would you want to poison yourself?
It is not a conscious act.
You’re poisoning yourself,
you are causing unpleasantness to yourself,
only because your mind is not taking instructions from you.
Isn’t it?
It is not taking instructions from you.
If it was taking instructions from you,
you would have said blissfulness. Isn't it?
You wouldn’t say anger.
But now when you want to be peaceful,
it is getting angry because it is not taking instructions from you.
So if your mind is not taking instructions from you,
you have to pay a little more attention to it.
Why is it not taking instructions from you?
If you understand this,
you don’t have to avoid anger,
because anger is not sitting there and getting at you,
you are becoming angry,
you are becoming unhappy,
you are becoming miserable.
These things are happening to you essentially because
you have not done anything to take your faculties under your control.
It is happening accidentally.
Just by chance.
If outside situations are good, you are also good.
If outside situations are bad, you are also bad.
That is not how human life should be.
Human life should be like this.
If I am good, everything around me becomes good.
This should be the reality. Isn't it?
Right now, if things around me are whichever way,
I will become that way.
No, no!
Human consciousness should create situations.
Right now situations are creating human consciousness.
That is not the right way to shape human life.
(Sadhguru): The needs within a human being have risen
because of a certain sense of incompleteness.
People are forming relationships to
experience a certain sense of completeness within themselves.
When you have a good relationship with someone dear to you,
you feel complete.
When you don’t have that, you feel incomplete.
Why is this so?
Because this life,
this piece of life is a complete entity by itself.
Why is it feeling incomplete?
And, why is it trying to fulfill itself
by making a partnership with another piece of life?
Fundamental reason is
that we have not explored this life in its full depth and dimension.
Though that is the basis,
there is a complex process of relationships as such.
There are expectations,
and
expectations and expectations and expectations.
The expectations that most people are creating are such
that there is no human being on the planet
who could ever fulfill those expectations.
In the process of holding a relationship,
the first moment of meeting the expectations may be common.
But as every step that we take in life, the expectations may become different.
Because these expectations keep changing in people,
they are not consistent and they cannot be.
One person may be consistent with the same expectation throughout their life;
another person’s expectations may be changing
because his perception and experience of life is changing.
Now relationships become great conflict.
More conflict is happening within the four walls of the homes
than is happening anywhere on the planet.
Only thing is bombs are not exploding so you don’t hear it.
They may be giving each other silent treatment. (Participants Laugh)
It is happening because peoples expectations are changing
and they are not changing at the same pace;
Fundamentally, why have we sought a relationship?
Because you find yourself that without a relationship,
if you do not have any kind of relationship in your life
then you become depressed.
So, fundamentally, you are seeking a relationship
because you want to be happy,
you want to be joyful.
Or in other words you are trying to use the other
as a source of your happiness.
if you are happy by your own nature,
now relationships will become a means for you to express your happiness not to seek happiness.
If you are forming relationships to seek happiness
and trying to squeeze happiness out of somebody
and that person is trying to squeeze happiness out of you,
now this is going to be a painful relationship after some time.
Initially it may be ok because something is being fulfilled.
But if you have become a joy by yourself
and you are forming relationships because you want to express your happiness,
nobody is going to complain about you
because you are in the process of expressing your joy
not seeking joy from the other person.
So if your life becomes an expression of your joy,
not in pursuit of happiness then relationships will be naturally wonderful.
You can hold a million relationships
and still hold them good.
Now, this whole circus of trying to fulfill somebody else’s expectations does not arise
because if you are an expression of joy
anyway they want to be with you.
Questioner: Only one question Guruji. We the human beings in the Earth,
are by chance or by choice of God or any super power?
Sadhguru: Why we are on this planet? (Laughter)
Questioner: By accident or by design of super power?
Sadhguru: I think even the planet is wondering why the hell these human beings came here.
(Laughter)
See,
the solar system, the way it is
and so as the other universal systems,
the galaxies,
they are all happening
because they arrive at a certain perfection of geometry.
Geometry, in the sense –
right now, this planet is going around the sun.
It’s found its perfect orbit.
So it's going and going and going,
not powered by engine or something.
See, the airplane is going powered by engines, it’s being pushed.
This is not being pushed.
This has just found a certain perfection of geometry
and it's going on.
The day it loses its perfection of geometry,
if it loses the line of orbit, it's gone.
So in this process,
life happens on this planet also involving this geometry,
on various levels.
We say in the yogic culture, we say a human being is physiologically
and in terms of brain,
has reached his peak physiologically,
that is after million years
you will not have a horn coming out of your head or something else
like the tail disappeared, something else will disappear,
this cannot happen.
We are saying this from a certain context.
Today, the modern neuroscientists are saying similar things.
They are saying the size of the neuron in the human brain
can neither increase,
nor can the wiring inside can increase
because the physical laws don’t permit it.
The laws of physics do not permit it.
I will not go into the detail of that.
To put it very simply,
how we see it is,
your birth here – right now,
all life on this planet is solar powered, isn't it?
Yes?
It is the sun’s energy which is doing all this.
Human... and also the...
the revolutions and the rotations of the moon also has influence upon us.
The very ocean is rising and falling with the movement of the moon.
Only because our mothers’ bodies were in tune with the cycle of the moon,
we are born and we are here.
Yes?
If these twenty eight days cycle of the moon does not repeat itself in a woman’s body,
you and me wouldn’t be born.
So because it has reached that, we say,
physical... the physical laws have come to a certain place
where life upon this planet, cannot evolve further.
You can make use of what you have in a much better way.
Using the same technology,
we had a dumb phone,
then we had a smart phone now we have iphone,
like this we can go on improving it, how we use it.
But the fundamental physical laws will not permit any further evolution of this creature.
So did it happen by accident?
No.
The Theory of Evolution –
you know Charles Darwin,
who made a monkey out of you? (Laughs)
Not me, him.
If you look at the Theory of Evolution
which was propounded just hundred and fifty years ago,
we have said this thousands of years ago,
in the sense,
you know the ten avataras?
At least the nine you know those who have come.
What is the first one?
MatsyaAvatara.
MatsyaAvatara means fish or water life.
All life on this planet started under water.
What is the next Avatara?
KoormaAvatara
amphibious like a turtle, half in the water, half on the land.
The next one is VarahaAvatara
a pig or a wild boar.
Among the mammals, one animal which is
strongly, strongly rooted in its body is a wild boar.
See, we live next to the forest,
we see this – the tribal boys can kill a deer with a stick.
If you hit it with a stick it will fall dead.
The local dogs will hunt the deer
but a wild boar you try to kill him and see, it's not easy to kill him.
You go smash him with the car, his spine is broken, still he will go.
He will not stop because he is so physically rooted.
His life is so physical.
So the next form of life was VarahaAvatara.
This simply means the Creator is finding expression in first as fish,
then as a turtle,
then as a wild boar.
Next one is Narasimha, half man, half animal.
Next one is Vamana a dwarfed man.
Next one is a full grown man
but emotionally volatile man who is Parasurama.
Next one is a peaceful man which is Rama.
Next is a loving man, which is a Krishna.
Next is a meditative man which is a Buddha.
The next is supposed to be a mystical being,
yet to come,
okay.
This is running very much in parallel lines with the Darwin’s Theory of Evolution.
Yes or no?
It’s in the same sequence,
exactly in the same sequence.
Darwin propounded his theory only hundred and fifty years ago,
this was said twelve to fifteen thousand years ago,
Adiyogi himself spoke about it.
So if you observe life,
you can clearly see from what is inanimate,
basic life formed from that life evolved,
we’ve always seen it that way.
Always we saw, life evolved.
Constantly we are – in every temple you go,
there is a snake,
there are various symbolisms all around the place
because even today in your brain,
one part of your brain is a reptilian brain.
You know, the core part of your brain is still a reptilian brain
and it still functions
and we have different practices in yoga as to how to transcend this reptilian brain
and allow the cerebral cortex to function
and today we have scientific evidence to show you
the University of California has done scientific studies on ShambhaviMahamudra,
the basic practice we teach usually
and they say if you practice ShambhaviMahamudra for three months,
the neuronal regeneration increases by two hundred and forty one percent,
a kind of percentage that’s never been recorded in the history of any kind of research,
okay.
Just a simple practice for twenty one minutes,
two hundred and forty one percentage increase in your brain function
and neuronal regeneration,
this means as you grow old
you will become more intelligent.
Usually young people think you are getting stupid. (Few Laugh)
Yes,
your brain is actually growing, you understand?
It's getting better by the day.
Now there is scientific evidence.
We always knew this, but today a meter has to say it;
if a man says it is not true.
If a man says it, it’s doubtful but a meter has to say it.
Now the meters are saying it.
The meters are saying your brain is actually growing
by doing a simple twenty one minute...
minute practice
and you don’t believe the meter.
You just do the practice for three months and see,
you will see how clear and how smart your mind is suddenly.
Sadhguru: . There are so many stories
as to how people always thought
Shiva was so uncouth,
uncivilized,
uncultured,
without any lineage,
does not belong to any caste or creed.
People thought he is no good
because he doesn’t have a lineage.
If you ask him who is your father, he doesn’t know
and he is uncouth
but they couldn’t help worshiping him
because he is intense
but nothing civilized about him;
nothing at all.
His friends were worse.
He kept such friendship
with all kinds of demons and goblins and distorted beings
that people saw him as a very uncivilized, uncouth, uncultured man.
So Parvathi fell in love with Shiva
and she wants to marry him.
She is a princess.
Her parents have not seen him.
On the day of the wedding
he arrives.
All the guests came,
all the kings and queens and gods and goddesses,
everybody arrived in procession;
one more beautiful than the other,
all dressed up
but then Shiva came
naked,
ash smeared,
inebriated.
Nobody knew what he is drunk upon
but he was inebriated
and all his friends were inebriated.
They came.
Parvathi’s mother Mina,
she saw and said,
‘What! You are going to marry this man?’
And she fainted.
She could not imagine handing over her daughter to this man.
And later on the wedding ceremony they sat down
and at the time of
you know like in India
when the wedding happens
people talk about the lineage of the family.
The girl has… comes from a great lineage;
her father is a king;
so many wonderful things were said.
Then they asked,
‘What about the groom’s lineage?
What is his gotram,
what is his nakshatram
and what's…under what star was he born?’
He simply sat silent.
They asked him,
‘Please tell us; because your parents are not here
you must at least tell your parents,
your lineage,
what family you come from,
what caste,
what creed,
at least what star you are born under.’
They repeatedly asked him.
He said nothing; simply sat;
almost uninterested in the wedding.
Then Narada came in to save the situation.
Why I am telling you this is;
when we talk about Shiva
we are not talking about a nice civilized man.
He is as beautiful as life can be
but as life is.
Today it is little cloudy;
tomorrow it could be pouring;
day after tomorrow it could be burning;
he is just like that;
just like life.
Not just like life,
he is just life.
He is not a pretension;
he is not repetitive in any way,
he is simply life.
What are you?
What are you?
What somebody taught you.
Every single thought, emotion, action
is the way somebody taught you.
Only if you are here as life
we can make you grow,
we can make you blossom.
If you are here as a bundle of memory
that you picked up from somebody,
all half baked people
if you are just a bundle of memory
then what's there to do?
Don't worry about your work. You give it up. What do you want? You want the roof? I'll give you you want food everyday
I'll give you all you have to do is just sit in one place and be blissful
I will feed you for the rest of your life
Can you do no you want to mess up something every day?
People say they are only working for a living I said don't worry. I'll give you shelter. I will give you food every day
No problem. All you have to do is I want to see tears of blissfulness every day
That's all the requirement you don't have to do any work. You don't have to serve me you don't have to produce anything nothing
Just sit here blissfully. We will feed you. We worship you so
The problem is not in your work the problem is not in your life. The problem is not in the world that you live
The problem is just that
You have not done the necessary things for
This one to flow through this
effortlessly, beautifully
The necessary work has not been done and we are just hoping it will happen by accident. It doesn't happen by accident
Lot of people in the world think United States of America is Heaven
But people who live here don't think so at all?
indeed a
Lot of people in the world are dying to get an entry into the country
You open up the Southern Borders?
Ten million people will enter tomorrow morning because they think this is having but you are not experiencing it that way
Isn't it you are not experiencing this as heaven
because
Heaven is not a geographical place
Helen Heaven is what you make out of yourself. Isn't it?
Too much talk about Heaven has been going on because there are too many people who made a hell out of themselves
If you had made a heaven out of yourself
Would you talk about going to Heaven?
If you sit here, and you're feeling ecstatic right now would you ask pyre to go to heaven? I'm asking
once it happened early 20th century
an
Orthodox Greek Church a bishop from that church you know Arturo
Greeks
Have their own separate church. They have their own pope who lives in turkey you know this
So our bishop from this order
Had heard so much about Indian mysticism, and he wanted to go to India
but he never got around to make it because
He had to serve the clock that he wore and after 60 years of age when he is semi-retired
He got the opportunity and went to India
So he came to South India
near where we are and
He wanted to meet a mystic yogi
So somebody said go up this mountain
near a cave there is a
Yogi sitting you can go sir our man went
Plotted up the mountain halfway up and went in front of a cave an old man
With a gentle smile upon his face was just sitting with his eyes closed
so the Bishop went and
prostrated
He cannot do it. He's not made for that
but they had told him if you go to India you have to
crawl
He prostrated like this and with all his four limbs. He got up the yogi looked at him with amusement
Obviously he has never prostrated anywhere before
and
He smiled
Then the bishop said I am like this. I'm a bishop. I have served in the church for so long
But I have a few questions. Can you answer?
The Yogi smiled and said yes, please, whatever the question
Then the Bishop asked what is life?
at the age of sixty
What is life?
So the yogi closed his eyes became very blissful and said
Life is like the Fragrance of a jasmine on the spring breeze
And tears of blissfulness flowed out of his eyes as you were saying this
Then the Bishop said no no no
Our pope has told us
Life is like a torn
And we must renounce it
And even symbolically, jesus himself wore a crown of thorns
So how come you say this our pope says otherwise?
The Yogi looked at him smiled and said well, that's his life
so
What'd you make out of it is not because of where you are
what you are
It is just what you make out of it, isn't it
So have you created the necessary?
Mechanism have you created the necessary system. Have you created the necessary ingredients within you to make this
Like the Fragrance of Jasmine on a spring breeze and not at all
If it's a torn we must pluck the damn thing out isn't it isn't it?
you
(Questioner): Dear Sadhguru,
it is well known that desire is the cause of all sorrows and tension.
But being a wife and a mother
I can’t get rid of these desires.
I seek your valuable advice in this regard. Thank you.
(Sadhguru): Now,
it’s not because you’re a wife
and in turn a mother
that your desires have come.
If you were nobody’s wife,
probably your were desiring,
when you were nobody’s wife,
you were desiring to be somebody’s wife.
Now that you’re somebody’s wife,
you desire to have a child and become a mother.
Now that you have a child,
now you’re saying,
“It is these two entities which is making me desire”.
It is not true.
If you are nobody’s nothing,
even then your desire will still burn within you, is that so?
Yes or no?
If you are nothing to nobody in the world,
still your desire will burn, isn’t it?
So please don’t think your desires are
because of your child or your husband or your family or whatever.
Anyway you would desire, because that’s your nature.
Now you made a statement
in the question that
“desire is the source of all misery”.
Desire is not the source of all misery,
unfulfilled desire is the source of all misery
isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
Desires fulfilled are the source of your joy,
unfulfilled desires is the source of your misery.
Now, what to do with the desire?
Shall we kill the desire?
I know people have been teaching you such things,
“You must kill all your desires.
Unless you destroy your desires,
your misery will not go.”
These teachings have come to you, isn’t it?
Now, if you want to destroy all your desires,
all you will have is,
you will have a great desire to destroy all your desires.
And you will remain eternally unfulfilled.
“I don’t want any desires!”
is this a desire?
Is this a desire or no?
Yes.
So if you try to play tricks with this,
it is not going to work.
Because desire is not desiring for anything in particular.
The energy which you call as desire
is not different from the energy that you call as life.
If you want to move from point A to point B,
you need a desire, isn’t it?
Now what brought you here today,
it is not your bus or car or something else.
It is your desire which has brought you here today, isn’t it?
What is it that will take you home?
It is your desire that will take you home.
What is it that will make you eat?
It is your desire which will make you eat.
So what you call as desire is not any different
from what you call as life.
Your life is desire.
The very basis of your life is desire, isn’t it?
So if I tell you “Kill the desire”,
the only way is to hang yourself.
There is really no other way.
Now, “I want to die”, that is also a desire, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
So do not deceive yourself with these things.
Desire is the very essence of your life.
But at the same time
you also know
that desire is an unending thing.
If you fulfill one,
the next one will be ready.
If you fulfill that, the next one will be ready.
It keeps you on all the time.
And obviously some desires will be unfulfilled
and those unfulfilled desires cause much misery to you.
If you look at the desire,
actually when we started,
this is what we were looking at,
we just did not use the word “desire”.
There is something within you
longing to be little more than what you are right now, isn't it?
That is desire.
So your desire’s ultimate goal is unboundedness,
the infinite nature.
But because you’re unaware,
you are giving it an unconscious expression
for the longing that is wanting to become unbounded.
So you don’t have to destroy your desire, because you cannot.
Can anybody destroy their desire?
Is it possible?
There is no way because that’s life.
It is just that
you have to make your desire into a conscious process.
Right now it is functioning unconsciously
because right now your desire is not even about you.
Please look at this.
Right now you’re living in Trivandrum or Tirivunathapuram,
your neighbor has a big car, what is your desire?
You want to have two cars like that.
Now you don’t know all these cars,
you are living in a remote place
and your neighbor has one big buffalo.
What is your desire?
You want to have two buffaloes like that.
So your desire is just a reaction to the social situations in which you’re living,
isn’t it?
This is so because this longing to expand is finding unconscious expression.
If you make your process of desiring into a conscious process,
then desire is no more a problem.
Then desire is a wonderful vehicle which will take you places.
Even if you want to reach the ultimate you need a desire, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Anyway the desire in you is longing for unboundedness,
it is longing for unlimitedness,
it is longing for the ultimate nature.
You just have to bring awareness to it.
If you bring awareness to your desiring process,
it is a wonderful instrument.
If it is finding unconscious expression,
then it makes you run like madman.
All the time it keeps you running endlessly.
So,
being a wife
being a mother,
it’s extremely important.
Now that you’re a mother,
not a small responsibility.
You brought another human being into this planet.
Now what kind of human being you produce
is a very huge responsibility isn’t it?
It is not just about reproduction,
what kind of next generation you create is in your hand, as a mother, isn’t it?
Yes?
What kind of people are going to live on this planet in the next generation
is decided by the mothers of today, isn’t it?
When such a responsibility you have,
you cannot afford to live unconsciously.
You must become conscious.
Especially the women must become conscious.
It’s very, very important.
Sadhguru: Stress is one aspect of life
that is making too many people’s life bitter.
Stress is like friction in a machine.
Stress is not a part of your life,
If you know how to manage your body,
your mind,
your emotions
and your energy,
there is no question of stress.
Most people think it is their job,
it is their family,
it is the life situations,
it’s the taxes,
it’s the unpaid bills, which are stress.
Stress is essentially
your inability to manage your own system -
that is,
there is not enough lubrication in the system
to function a smooth and easy way.
Life situations are always there for everyone
but each person manages it differently
depending upon how smoothly his or her own system… functions within itself.
If you know how to manage this (Referring to oneself)
human system or this human mechanism,
then there is no question of stress.
If you think the work that you’re doing is important,
the first thing is you have to work upon yourself.
If you have intentions of wanting to expand the scope of your life,
first thing that you have to do is
work upon yourself
because how successful you are in the world
essentially depends how friction-free (Referring to oneself) this mechanism is.
You can bring your system to a frictionless state of function with simple practices.
Yogic sciences have a whole array of practices.
Here we offer you a few simple tools for a stress-free life.
to be successful in the world
two fundamental qualities are that
you must be able to harnass the provess of your mind and your body
Essentially
if your energy body is balanced and fully activated
there can be no physical or psychological ailment in you.
It’s simply not possible.
I can show you hundreds and thousands of people
who walked out of their ailments completely,
simply, not by any treatment,
simply by bringing a certain balance to the system.
There are any number of people,
it is not some kind of miraculous thing.
It is just a deeper understanding of the system
and the system is a miracle,
there is no question about that.
This is a miracle, isn’t it?
No?
Yes or no?
It’s a phenomenal miracle, isn’t it?
So the magic is already there.
You just have to play with it right. That’s all.
You don’t have to do any extra magic.
Already everything is magical, isn’t it so in the existence.
Yes or no?
Every atom is a magic by itself
because we have still not figured anything in its entirety.
So,
very simple,
you don’t have to do any great yoga of twisting yourself
upside down and all that.
Simple things.
If you breath right and keep your body in a certain level of balance
you will see there is no need
to have any kind of ailments.
Ailments are of two kinds.
One is infectious.
Infectious means it’s an invasion from outside.,
that we have to deal with medicine.
For that you must go to the doctor.
But over seventy percent of the ailments on the planet are chronic in nature.
That means you are producing your own ailments.
Self- help this is called (Laughs)
because nobody is bothering you;
you want to do something to yourself
so most over seventy of the ailments are because of self help.
People are generating ailments from within.
And this cannot be cured by any medicine.
You can only manage it.
You can never cure it.
But the very source of making this body is within us.
It comes from within.
Your heart, liver, kidney everything is manufactured from within. Isn’t it?
If you do certain simple things,
if you allow,
fixing also happens from within
and every human being is capable of this.
It is just that they have never paid attention to it.
Only advantage is,
if you go to a doctor, he will do it.
These things you must do, that’s the only problem. (Laughs)
Sadhguru: one thing I would like to clear about the question is
this is not a concept
this is the whole problem with life
everybody is propounding their own concepts,
their own philosophies, their own ideologies all the time.
Why is it that nobody is willing to look at life the way it is?
Because somewhere human beings are too enamored with their own logic,
with their own intellect.
Now the biggest problem on the planet is just this,
see this… this cosmos, you know,
today the Hubble telescope has gone
and they are talking about over hundred billion galaxies,
not hundred billion stars;
hundred billion galaxies and now we know there are more.
In such a huge vast cosmos the solar system
our solar system is like a speck.
Tomorrow morning if the whole solar system evaporates,
nobody is going to miss it.
It’s not even on account.
In this speck, planet earth is a super speck.
In that super speck, right now Chennai is a micro super speck.
In that you are a big man - that is the whole problem. (Laughter/Applause)
You are having concepts about the universe,
concepts about creation
because somewhere you think the whole universe spilled out of your brains.
No,
you and me are so small here;
we are like a speck of dust.
If we evaporate right now, everything is going to be fine,
nothing is going to change.
A few people around us will cry and forget about us in three days.
Everything is going to be fine.
So we, first of all,
to understand the context of who we are,
this is not a concept.
Who the hell are you to even think up a concept about this universe?
Because you are… you are a micro minute speck.
If you can perceive something of this, it's fantastic.
So that’s why I said the whole system of yoga –
there are no concepts,
there’re no philosophies,
there’re no ideologies,
there’re no belief systems –
only methods to enhance your perception
because only what you perceive is real,
rest is all made up in your head.
This process that we have set forth now,
that we''re referring to as 'Shivanga'.
Anga means a limb,
that means a limb of Shiva; you''re a part of him.
So being a part of the Creator;
from the transition, or the journey
is from being a part of creation
to be part of the source of creation or the Creator.
This is something that is infused in all of us,
not just as human beings.
Every life around us has the same source
but the biggest advantage we have
or the biggest challenge we have,
the biggest possibility that we have in our lives is
we are capable of realizing it.
We are capable of making it into a conscious process.
None of the other creatures can do it.
None of the other life forms;
though they are made of the same stuff,
they are never ever able to realize that they are made of this stuff.
But if you light the fire of devotion in your heart,
you will not live here as a piece of earth,
but you will live here as a limb or a part of Shiva.
So as devotees, I want you to bring
a new level of sensitivity to everything around you.--
I want you to bring this culture of new level of sensitivity
and devotion should become the most beautiful and attractive thing.
It has always been.
This is what human heart longs for
that it wants to be on fire without reason.
If it is not on fire without reason, you will set it on fire with hormones.
If there is no devotion, you desperately try to cling to somebody.
If there is devotion, you will see
whatever you want is happening within you;
the most beautiful things are happening within you.
There is no time even to look around for anything
because so much is happening within you.
It will be good to do a few years of sadhana
and bring that sense of devotion,
which is absolute balance within yourself.
When you are a devotee, you are in total balance
because devotion brings that dimension into you.
It looks like an extreme process.
Devotion or a devotee is an extremist
who is not against anything.
We need such people.
Right now, we create extremists who are always against somebody.
I want you to just imagine
people
like the terror people.
They are causing havoc on this planet
but there is one dimension to them, which is very valuable,
that is they are willing to die for what they hold as valuable.
This is a great quality;
only thing is they are against somebody.
That's the only problem.
Suppose they had no enemy;
suppose you have no enemy and you are incapable of a (an?) enemy
but you are an extremist, you would be a fantastic, intense human being, isn't it?
A very intense and wonderful life you would be,
if only you did not make an enemy within yourself.
If you do not create an enemy and you are an extremist it's a great way to be,
because you will live an intense life;
absolutely intense life.
When you are not for anything or against anything,
just an extremist,
you will be a great piece of life.

[Questioner] Namaskaram Sadhguruji, could you please explain me what is aura?
[Sadhguru] What is?
[Questioner] Aura, A-U-R-A, Aura.
[Sadhguru] Aura? Oh!
Every substance on the planet has a certain field of energy around it
or what you see as substance on the planet is actually energy.
It's a scientific fact that the whole existence is energy.
One part of the energy has manifested itself into a certain level of reverberation
which makes it a physical form.
Another part of the energy does not manifest itself into a physical form but it still has a form.
So, that form which is not yet physical or refuses to become physical
but still maintains a form, that’s an aura …or that’s being called an aura.
Auras are of many kinds. One can carry from a pitch black aura to a pure white aura.
Between these two, there are a million shades.
Essentially the physical, mental, emotional and energy status of who you are right now
in a certain way is represented by your aura; or it's visible through the aura.
Too many fancy things have been told about it by the…particularly by the new age community today.
Lot of it is fiction but there is some substance to it.
I don’t think you should concern yourself about such things.
Don’t try to see people’s aura. Aura is the periphery of the person.
I would like you to look little more at the core of the being rather than looking at the surface.
Surface is for the doctors because they want to fix some physical part that may be going wrong with somebody.
Surface should not be the interest of a spiritual seeker. This is more surface than the skin;
what you call as aura is even more superficial than the skin because it's even further out.
So, it may have certain… if one has the necessary insight …may have certain,
give you certain access to the nature of the person but you're only looking at the
psychological, emotional and physical structure of the human being.
It is best people on the spiritual path ignore the aura, yours and everybody’s
and focus on the core.
If you're focused on the core you will have a wonderful aura.
If you're focus is on the surface you will have a miserable aura.
So don’t keep looking at other people’s aura and your own.
It's time you looked at the core of this one and that one.
If you look at the core of this one then naturally you will see the core of everything
because in core ‘this and that’ doesn’t exist. In core only this exists.
On the surface ‘this and that’ exists.
So… you know people said beauty is skin deep. Yes certain type of beauty is skin deep.
You wouldn’t like somebody with their skin peeled off. If you saw somebody’s skin
peeled off you wouldn’t think they're beautiful even if they're the same people; that way - yes.
But aura is not even skin deep, so it's not worth spending time on it.
If you become conscious of the core the surface may be just visible to you,
but you trying to see and read people’s aura is a stupid thing to do;
you'll waste your life trying to do such things.
If you're conscious, if your perception is enhanced you may see things.
It's good to see things which are there. If you start seeing things which are not there,
that’s …you... have to... …you're graduating from ashram to asylum.
If lot of you go in that direction we can transform the ashram into an asylum. Yes.
So, it's very important we want to keep this as an ashram. You want to make it into an asylum? Hum? No.
We want to keep this as an ashram. So please, if you want to keep this as an ashram
you must be focused on the core, not on the surface.
Too much surface means we’ll make the place into an asylum.
All kinds of nut cases who believe they're spiritual, there are too many like that on the planet,
they are the biggest deterrent for other people to seek any spirituality.
Because of too many nutcases like this, right thinking people who are little more sensible
don’t want to have anything to do with spirituality. So, please don’t make this into an asylum.
If you need to go we will promote you but don’t turn the place into an asylum.
[Sadhguru] If you are capable of causing depression to yourself
I'm saying this not without any concern for your illness or not due to lack of compassion,
because that is the nature of what's happening to you.
If you're causing depression to yourself, you are able to generate
substantial amount of intense emotions and thoughts, but in the wrong direction.
If you don't have very strong emotions, very intense thoughts about something, you cannot get depressed.
It is just that you are generating thoughts and emotion which work against you, not for you.
So you are strong enough to cause depression to yourself,
because for you to cause a mental illness for yourself
unless you are pathologically ill which is just a small number of people, rest are all self-created.
Most of them are self-created. A few are pathologically ill, it's... they cannot help it.
It just comes from within because of genetic and other factors.
Almost everybody here, if we train them towards a certain kind of thought process
and emotion and push them a little bit with the outside situations,
almost everybody will go... lose their mental balance, they will become clinically ill.
They can be driven to madness, I'm saying,
because the line between sanity and insanity is very thin, people keep pushing it.
You get angry, you're pushing the line; it's a thin line. In fact when you get angry you
know you're pushing the line, that's why the expression, 'I was mad at somebody.'
You are not mad at somebody, you're just going mad. You cannot be mad at somebody,
you're just pushing your sanity, the boundaries of sanity and moving into insanity,
for a certain period of time and coming back. You do one thing, every day you try this --
10 minutes a day try intense anger on somebody. What?
You will see in three months' time, you will be clinically there. Yes.
Just try it, if you want. Because if you keep pushing the line-- you go mad and you come back,
you go mad and you come back -- one day you're not able to come back, that's all.
One day you're not able to turn back, then you're clinically ill.
You must understand even if you got angry for a moment, you're already ill;
maybe you don't get the certificate of diagnosis,
they don't slap a certificate on you that you're gone, but you are going, isn't it?
You think it's your right to throw tantrums,
you think it's your right to get angry with people,
you think it's your privilege to be depressed so that you'll get attention from somebody.
You keep playing this, one day you will not able... you will not be able to turn back.
Keep crossing the line every day, one day you will see you cannot cross back,
that day you need a doctor. Till then everybody needed a respite from you,
but the day you can't cross back they get the respite,
because now they can catch you and give you to a doctor.
Otherwise you're temporarily going mad, every day many times a day,
they cannot even send you to an asylum, they have to bear with you --
your family, your friends, your people around you.
If you get at least truly clinically ill, we can hand you over.
There's one temple in Tamil Nadu, you know? Where they chain you and keep you?
Where there's no hospital. No psychological..., for ailments there is no hospital.
There is a temple that somebody created which is supposed to push people back into sanity.
So families just take them and leave them there; they're shackled and left in the temple.
You give them some money, they will feed you, and you're just there like an animal, tied up.
I think if hospitals were run like this, lot of people wouldn't go crazy,
they would maintain their sanity. Right now it's too deluxe.
If you make hospital extremely comfortable it will become an incentive to become sick,
and you have incentives in your life to become ill. Right from your childhood,
you got the maximum attention only when you fell ill.
When you were happy they screamed at you.
When you squealed in joy they screamed back at you -- adults.
You do... Then bubbu bubbu bubbu bubbu
When you are a child, physical illness is good
because you'll get attention from your mother and father and everybody around you,
and you don't have to go to school on that day.
So you learn the art of falling physically ill.
But once you get married, you'll learn the art of becoming mentally ill;
because if you want to get attention you go sit in a corner act depressed, people will pay attention to you.
So you keep playing this game, one day you're not able to cross the line back, that day you're clinically ill.
Unfortunately, in many ways, not just in the way that I said now, in many different ways,
I would say 70% of illnesses on the planet, all kinds, are self-created.
Even if you get an infection, there is a way, if you keep yourself in a certain way
physically and mentally, the virus and the bacteria will not work the same way
as it works upon somebody else. If you set yourself like this,
'No matter what's happening, anyway I have to go and do this, this and this, there's no break from that...'
In the last 29 years I have not been able to cancel one program
because I'm running temperature or I got a cold, I got this, I got that.
It doesn't matter what's happening, what you have to do you anyway have to do;
you can't turn back on that. Either out of your commitment or you have a boss like that,
one way or the other if it happens, then you will see you will not at all fall sick so often;
because if you have temperature you still have to go. If it's summer you still go, right?
No, lot of people don't go. It's little hot outside, they don't go and work.
Little cold outside, they don't go and work. Little raining, they won't go and work.
A snow flake, they will not go and work. This is just weather.
So for every change in weather, if you have the comfort of covering yourself in a blanket
and lying down, once you create that, your body will learn to fall sick as often as possible.
If you just keep it this way it doesn't matter what it is,
anyway I have to go and do what I have to do, you will see your body will just bounce
back as quickly as possible, even if it gets the worst kind of infections.
So you just have to set the necessary conditions for health,
necessary incentives for health, both for yourself and your children if you have them.
Do not set incentives for sickness. The child is sick, observe him from a distance,
never go cuddling - he knows that's the worst time of his life, and he knows he has to get well soon.
And give him the best attention when he is joyful, you will see he naturally learns from within,
his very chemistry will learn that it pays to be joyful, it doesn't pay to be sick.
If you make this very clear to your own biology, to your own chemistry and to everybody around you,
you will see people will not fall sick as often as they are right now.
So set that up for yourself, you will see you will get healthy.
If you can turn your mind this way, you can also turn it this way, I want you to understand this.
'No, no I am like this because my father abused me when I was 7 years of age.'
If you know all that bullshit, you can as well turn yourself around, isn't it?
It's time. You must understand mentally, physiologically, chemically, energy-wise --
you must clearly understand it doesn't pay to be sick, unhappy, depressed; it doesn't pay.
To be joyful and ecstatic, it pays.
If you make this clear to all this people inside, they will all behave properly.
Sadhguru: I’ve seen both kinds
some older generation always complaining that
the younger generation not showing enough interest
or not engaged as they should be,
not responsible enough,
not judicious enough, whatever.
In this, some may be a genuine case of responsible action or irresponsible action.
This also depends on –
because you’re successful you thought you have to heap your children with too many things.
Like some wise saying is there, “You must give them enough so that they can do something,
not enough so that they don’t have to do anything” (Laughs).
So somewhere you gave them enough so that they
somewhere they perceived or conceived that they don’t have to do anything in their life
because there is enough.
And after all, once again, we don’t have to
I’m… I’m reminding in the line of questioning for you not to forget,
after all entrepreneurship is economic activity.
Economic activity need not be raised to heaven, okay?
It must be conducted on the planet to the extent it’s necessary for you
and the world around you.
So that is why I said, no entrepreneur should become unipolar.
They think the only way they can be successful is by being unipolar.
No.
By b… being multi-polar, they will become far more capable than being unipolar.
If you become unipolar, you may achieve success
but that success will never drench you with
either joy or… nor can you enjoy what
what physical situations you have created.
It will not happen because you are still unipolar
and in unipolar nature you will become very small because
the number of dimensions that are there in life,
if you do not pay attention to all of it,
if you do not engage in some level with a few things at least,
you will
you will miss the process of life in the name of economics.
It may be good for the next generation
because there’s a windfall for them (Laughs).
But in family enterprises usually the struggles are
both the generations where they’re engaged in business
as I said earlier, older generation… Well,
I have met older generations which are more enterprising than the younger generations.
There’re many family businesses – successful businesses – in India like that.
And the older generation created it, so they’re constantly on the ball.
The younger generation landed on top of the hill.
You’ve seen this in the political sphere also.
So those who created it, they have a different sense of everything.
Those who just landed into the comfort or the lap of what has already been created,
they have a different sense of everything.
So it’s very important if the older generation wants the cooperation
and… a sensible cooperation from the younger generation,
they must give them a challenge and an opportunity to create something
within what has already been created.
There is always a risk they may fail,
but there was always a risk that you could fail when you started.
It’s just that you have succeeded;
somebody may actually fail right in front of you.
But if you don’t create that, if you don’t create that challenge and opportunity,
then they will not understand what you’re talking
because they don’t know what it means to build something.
They’re always there in already built things.
They will not understand what it means to build something.
So, I think the older generation to take that responsibility and risk
of allowing younger generation to create something
maybe not risking everything
but at least a part of it -
that risk must be taken, that challenge must be offered.
Only then they are also truly entrepreneurs.
Otherwise they’re inheritors, they’re landlords.
Landlords are not on their toes, they’re on their ass (Laughs).
Yes.
An entrepreneur has to be on his toes always.
An entrepreneur means eternally you’re on your toes,
not even on your heel.
Landlord sits back (Laughs).
Time 53:27
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru
Sadhguru: Who is speaking?
Questioner: If time is relative can we time-travel?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) So
you want to go into the past or the future.
Isn’t… Isn’t this the biggest problem in the world?
people are time-travelling within themselves?
They are trying to live what happened ten days ago,
or they’re trying to live what may happen day after tomorrow,
hmm?
Time-travel is the biggest problem,
don’t seek it,
it’s already a great problem.
Now that’s not what you are asking
you want to know what happened in the past
or you want to know what’ll happen tomorrow.
When he said,
“Mere bare me kuch bolo (Please say something about me),”
whatever (Laughter)
what he is telling me is
why don’t you time-travel for me
and tell me what’ll happen tomorrow, okay?
Yes?
That’s all he is asking.
So I have to wear my astrological clothes (Laughter).
see
if you transcend your physical nature
there is no such thing as time.
There is
in… In India in this culture we have a word called trikala gnani,
that means one who knows past, present and future.
This does not mean he is time-travelling,
that is a
what these Hollywood movies
which misunderstand
everything logically and literally
So why I am saying this is
they are always trying to understand everything factually, literally.
When we said there is a trikala gnani,
they said, “Oh, there is somebody who goes into past, present and future.”
See
this moment is eternity,
I want you to know,
it’s question of are you living in the surface
or have you… have you… do you have a profound experience of what’s now?
What you think is past,
what you think is future
or what you think is now is all one happening,
they are not three different happenings.
They are not three different dimensions
or three different geographical spaces
that you can go into and come back.
When you use the world travel
it suggests movement, isn’t it?
I travel from point A to point B,
I can’t travel from point A to point A,
point A to point A,
point A to point A
– I cannot travel
unless I’m making rounds.
So right now when you say past, present and future
you are talking about triple A, you understand?
It’s A, A, A,
it’s not A, B, C.
When we say time,
in the yogic perception,
which ultimately modern physics will come to someday hopefully is,
time is the basic aspect of creation
because of time there is gravity,
because of gravity everything else.
Right now the problem with modern physics is
they have reasonably understood the other forces,
they are unable to understand what’s gravity.
Gravity is a consequence of time,
it’s not the other way round.
Because there is time there is gravity.
The word time itself may not
conjure that image in your mind.
The Sanskrit word is correct, it’s kala.
Kala means two things
time and emptiness.
Kali –
not talking about the Devi,
Kali means what? Empty.
Kala means darkness.
Kala means time and it also means emptiness.
If you try to speak with little more personified context
we will call this Shiva.
So we are talking about time and emptiness,
time and nothingness as the same thing.
Because there is time
there is creation,
because what we call as creation exists
there is gravity
because to maintain the integrity of
a little bit of physicality in this vast kala –
you need some force to hold it together.
So gravity is only when time bends in a certain way.
Time which is nothingness,
time which is emptiness
takes a curve.
When it takes a curve physical dimension begins.
If it doesn’t take a curve physical does not exist.
So when we say spiritual process
you’re trying to get out of the curve
because whatever curves
ultimately will go in circles, isn’t it?
So because you experience time
as a consequence of the curve that it took
you’re understanding time as the spin of the planet,
as the rotation of the moon and the sun and whatever else.
But when we refer to kala,
we are talking about time in a more fundamental way
that it is emptiness.
It is nothingness,
it is… clear space is time.
We are always
the modern concept is talking about
time and space as two different things.
We are talking about
time and space as one thing,
the existential is gravity.
The non-existential presence that is there is
kala or kali or emptiness or time or whatever you want to call it or darkness –
all these things symbolize the same thing.
So if somebody travels in time
he’s lost his mind.
Really,
I know books are written about it.
Don’t… Don’t ever believe
please… I want you to understand,
you throw up a new concept
let’s say a scientific community throws up a new concept
or philosophically some new concept comes.
Instantly there will be hundred authors in America,
first eighty will come from America,
next ten will come from India maybe these days.
They will write books about
how they experience this concept which may not even exist.
Powerful books will be written
and one generation will grow up on that and it will die.
Next generation has not even heard about
what… the books that were popular in seventies and eighties –
this generation has not even heard about those things
which shaped those people’s psyche completely.
So this time travel business,
this near death (Laughs) stuff that’s going on,
these are popular subjects right now.
I would advise you write a book,
you will sell well, make money, it’s all right.
If it’s your survival,
write something
but if you… it’s your seeking don’t bullshit yourself into something
and you’ll get lost.
Don’t do time travel
because you cannot do time travel.
Time as you know it only exists
because of your physical nature.
If you really want to know the profoundness of time,
if you want to know the kala
which holds everything together,
which holds everything in its lap,
you must distance yourself from your physical nature.
Then you know kala not as three
but three As superimposed on each other
not A, B, C.
So then you will not try to travel.
You will dimensionally
dimensional shifts within you… you… within yourself,
not psychological understanding of time.
What happened yesterday is one time,
what’s happening now is another time,
what may happen tomorrow is another time
not in that context.
They are not three separate things.
Actually what happened yesterday
if you sit here and imagine all that
it’ll all happen now, isn’t it?
Yes?
What may happen tomorrow
if you sit here and if you have powerful enough imagination,
it’ll happen right now.
This is why people are suffering something that happened ten years ago
and something that may happen day after tomorrow,
yes?
They are enjoying and suffering things which don’t exist.
So if you try to do time travel
you will lose your mind and think you are experiencing something.
Psychological… Psychological drama that you create in the form of thought and emotion
is not life,
it is a badly directed movie (Laughter).
Questioner: ‘Does anything worry you?
Do you have bad days?’
The question is from Subhashini.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) First of all, I don’t have days
because the days are only in your memory.
In your reality there is only now, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
The problem right now is
human intellect
See, of all the gadgets that you have
I know he is looking into the
his favorite gadget.
What are you?
Apple or Samsung… you’re?
Questioner: Apple
Sadhguru: Okay. (Laughs)
No, because it is a religion, so I am asking. (Laughter/Applause)
It’s almost like asking,
are you Hindu, Muslim, Christian, what are you? (Laughter)
Are you Apple, Samsung or Blackberry? (Laughter)
We’re almost getting there, isn’t it?
So, human intellect,
of all the gadgets that you have,
even including the Apple,
human mind is the most sophisticated gadget on this planet.
Do you agree with me?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Every other gadget has come out of this.
But we are busy looking into the iPhone,
completely missing the ‘I’. (Laughter)
Right now, for most human beings
let me not use the word ‘most’.
For too many human beings,
this mind is not a miracle that it actually is.
For so many human beings,
this mind has become a misery-manufacturing machine.
All the misery,
human misery on this planet - where is it manufactured?
Madras? (Laughter)
No, in your mind, isn’t it?
What should have been the greatest miracle
unfortunately has become a source of misery for human beings.
Why is this so?
There are two dimensions to your intelligence.
One is perception,
one is the penetration of your intelligence,
another is the memory aspect of it.
Because of the kind of education systems that you’re suffering right now
which is one hundred percent memory based,
all you have to do is memorize something,
vomit it somewhere.
Your idea of being intelligent right now has become purely memory based.
Tonight
today evening at the tea-party,
you don’t have to know anything.
You just have to surf the internet,
pick up some facts about that sixty four… you know,
T-64 galaxy that nobody knows about;
you get some information and throw it around.
People think you’re smart. (Laughter)
Because our whole idea of intelligence has become memory, unfortunately.
Once you’re dipping your hand into memory,
your intelligence becomes very cyclical
because it’s recycling the past in so many different ways.
It looks smart for somebody who doesn’t know that,
otherwise it’s just nonsense.
Today, we know a god-damn chip can record more than your brain can record.
It is not intelligence.
Memory is just a resource,
it is not an intelligence.
The nature of the intelligence and the purpose of human intellect is
that it should be able to penetrate,
but it has got such a huge backlog,
it’s identified with memory in such a bad way,
it has lost its penetration.
It is like you have a knife.
Intellect is like a knife, it can cut through anything.
But now you have a knife where the apple is sticking. (Laughter)
Now whatever you try to cut, it’s not going to cut anything
because there is a big apple sticking here.
This is what has happened.
A huge bank of memory is sticking to it
and it’s lost its penetration.
This is a tremendous loss that’s happened to humanity
because of the nature of education systems that we have crafted.
So the fundamental process of spiritual process is
to sharpen this intellect in such a way that
if you sit here, your memory does not influence you,
your intelligence is simply here.
It sees everything just the way it is.
If this doesn’t happen to you,
your intellect will become the source of your suffering.
You will see
educated people are definitely suffering more than the uneducated on this planet, isn’t it so?
They’re also causing much more suffering.
The planet is suffering mainly because of educated people,
not because of uneducated people, yes or no?
The very life of the planet is being threatened by the educated,
not by the uneducated.
Because it is a completely memory-based education.
It is not intelligence-based education.
We need to shift this.
If the education systems are not going to shift it,
as individual people you must shift
especially if you want to be an entrepreneur.
An entrepreneur means you must create an opportunity where there isn’t one.
That is enterprise, isn’t it?
Sadhguru: That is your karma. (Laughter)
See, you can choose to eat whatever you want, isn’t it?
You can
you can eat rice grown in Tamil Nadu
Tamil mannu will become part of you.
So if you eat chapatti,
maybe Punjabi mitti is becoming part of you.
These days people are eating fruits that come from New Zealand
maybe you’re slowly you know acquiring the karma of a kangaroo,
because kangaroo manure has gone into it.
Yes?
So it is all the same earth,
but you can choose which part of the earth you can make it a part of you, isn't it?
So similarly it’s all the same energy,
but you can make something else out of it.
Everybody ate rice only probably today,
but not everybody is the same,
because you are given the freedom to do whatever you want with it.
With the same earth you can produce rice,
you can produce wheat,
you can produce ragi,
you can make a mango,
you can make a coconut,
you can make whatever, isn't it?
So with the same energy, you made it like this,
she made it like that,
I made it like this,
he made it like that;
same energy.
This is why we said the way you are is your karma.
That means it's your doing.
This is the only culture, which is very very clear
that the way you are is not God’s doing.
The way you are is your doing.
It's your karma means, it's your doing.
Creation is not your doing,
but the way you are,
the way you’re experiencing life,
what you are attracting,
what you’re getting into is one hundred percent your doing.
It is your karma.
So right now, you look at yourself,
if you don’t like the way you are,
do the right karma.
Yes?
You’ve not done the right thing.
That’s all.
If you are right now sitting like this, (Gestures)
you want to sit like this,
come here three months,
I’ll tell you want to do, you’ll sit like this. (Gestures)
Yes?
So if you sit like this, it's called a pyramid, you know.
Pyramids were built for the dead, not for the living.
If you’ve taken the shape of a pyramid,
you must understand this is the abode of the dead.
This is not the abode of the living.
The living has to be housed in a beautiful house,
yes?
The dead can be put up in a pile of rocks which we call a pyramid.
So if you are growing into the form of a pyramid,
you must work it out.
It's your karma,
this is your also your karma,
this is also your karma.
Joy is also your karma;
misery is also you karma.
Isn't it wonderful, your life is your business and nobody’s business?
Is it not wonderful?
No?
Is it not wonderful, your life is your business and nobody’s business?
You can make whatever you want out of it.
Is it not wonderful?
There cannot be more compassion for someone as small as you.
In this creation, who are you?
You are a tiny speck,
to you this much freedom has been given,
that you can shape your life the way you want it.
Isn't this fantastic?
Isn't this the ultimate compassion?
Ooof means you’re gone,
but to you who is not even like a worm in this cosmos,
you are like a speck of dust,
to you so much freedom has been given that you can shape your life the way you want it.
If you want you can become god-like.
If you want you can become just a lump of earth.
Whatever you choose, it's left to you.
Is it not wonderful?
Is it not wonderful?
Absolutely wonderful, isn’t it?
So it’s your karma.
Sadhguru: If you look at the classic yogic system,
it is essentially created for the male body.
They did not consider the female body because
females never came for sadhana in those times.
It was not possible for them to come,
for various reasons
biological reasons,
social reasons,
the way everything else was
and because yoga was not taught in a studio,
it was taught by some guru somewhere in some cave,
in some mountains,
some forest,
a woman could not go in those days.
So largely,
ninety percent of the yogic system was oriented towards the male body,
not towards the female body.
So many systems of yoga,
which are being recklessly taught today
could damage a woman’s body if not properly handled.
One of the things that you are learning is mayurasana.
They told you not to do mayurasana?
Yeah,
because that’s not suitable.
It’s a peacock asana,
not a peahen asana. (Laughter)
So like this there are many aspects,
some of them are very physical aspects,
some of them more subtle, but they are there.
There are certain things a woman should not do at all.
There are certain things that she should not do at certain times.
So what she should not do at all?
Generally in Isha Yoga we have not even looking at those things,
except mayurasana and a few other things which are not
in coming in touch with you.
For brahmacharies we have a few things which
which are not necessary for others.
So during certain times what you should not do depends from one moment to another.
It could be little different.
Not everybody suffers those few days as much as somebody else.
For some people it throws whole… their whole life off the track.
Some people go through it without much disturbance,
either in their psychological or physiological system.
So depending upon how a particular person is,
mild adjustments will have to be made,
but if we are doing anything which is very forceful,
if we’re doing any practice which is forceful in nature,
it is best to avoid it at those times,
because any forceful activity could cause agitation in the body and in the mind,
because at that time naturally body is seeking a certain amount of rest,
a certain amount of quiet
not agitated activity.
There are certain other aspects which are more towards kriya than asana.
If you have learned to do asana in a very relaxed way,
it’s all right to do everything.
If you are still not there, it’s better to avoid a few things.
But if you do asanas properly,
the struggles that you are having with your monthly cycles should completely go away;
at least the pain and the cramps and the works should just completely disappear
if your sadhana is right.
If it has increased after sadhana, you must wait for three months.
After three months if it’s still not reduced then we must relook at your sadhana,
how you’re doing it.
What you’re doing may be okay but how you are doing needs to be looked at.
With kriyas there are more restrictions.
With asana there is not much restriction.
There may be some practices which are physical postures and also kriyas
they are the things that you need to be really careful about.
Like we are doing surya kriya.
Surya kriya needs to be looked at carefully
because if too much sun burns within you then
it’s very good on one level
but if it’s troubling you in your feminine aspect,
then we need to re-adjust it,
we need to re-jig it a little bit for you;
it’s very important that it’s individual,
there is no common prescription like that.
But generally what’s being taught as Isha Yoga need not be avoided,
it’s all fine,
except the kapalabhati, everything else is fine, can be done.
Sadhguru: So what is the role I’m going to play?
As the word Guru suggests
gu means darkness, ru means dispeller
dispelling darkness.
How to dispel darkness?
You cannot kick the darkness out of a place
because
darkness is not an existence by itself.
Darkness is just absence of light.
When we say light,
we value light
because it brings clarity to us.
If there was no light, you cannot see clearly.
Where there is light, you can see clearly.
So what you actually value is not light, it is the clarity that it brings.
So essentially it doesn’t matter
in what stage of life you are,
what aspect of life you are addressing,
the most important thing is
that you want clarity about it.
You want to be able to see it the way it is.
Seeing things the way they are,
seeing everything the way it is, is clarity.
The work of a Guru is essentially,
not to bring morality to you but to bring spirituality to you.
The difference is just this –
one is an imposition,
another is a natural blossoming
to see that this human nature reaches its ultimate possibility.
So as a Guru, what role will I play?
I’m
I have very strong sense of aesthetics.
Because of that,
only if you strive to keep yourself open,
depending upon how much openness you create,
that much of an active role I will play.
If you allow me,
I will even decide what you should eat for your breakfast
Not as an imposition,but as a natural choice.
I’m saying, in the most mundane things also it can find expression.
‘So you're going to come
and between idli and dosa you will choose for me?’
Not like that.
You're walking on the street,
whether you step into a pit or on the road or on the pavement
is determined not by you but by the sunlight, isn’t it?
In that sense yes, every aspect -
if you are willing.
If you want to have your own life, it’s up to you.
You want me only to influence your spiritual life only, I’m fine.
Some people see sunlight only when they go on a vacation,
once a year
Some people, every day in the morning,
they wake up early in the morning just to welcome the sun.
That’s your choice;
I’ll leave that to you.

the word engineering essentially means
To make something happen - something that we want - we will make it happen in the most efficient possible way
that's engineering. If you're doing it in horribly inefficient ways, that cannot be called engineering, isn't it ?
We will say this is a fine piece of engineering
when something that we want is happening with least amount of friction and
with least amount of
consumption
so if you have a body that
If you use it for 12 hours, it sleeps for another 12 hours, it needs 12 hours of maintenance
Sleep is maintenance time you know
if you had a car that
You use it for 15 days, [and] 15 days it's in the garage
It's better to take the public transport
Now you have a body which has to sleep 10 to 12 hours a day
Now this is not an efficient system. It's not being managed properly
Probably the fuel is not good
maybe your engine is leaking
So is this all physical? No. Maybe medically you have been certified fit.
But still if you need to sleep 8 to 10 hours
which unfortunately
people are saying - qualified people are saying - is standard, that every human being must sleep 8 to 10 hours
It's a horribly inefficient perception of what a human machine is, isn't it?
This is the most sophisticated machinery on the planet, this human mechanism.
If this mechanism is made such a way, that half the time it's in maintenance, you cannot call it the most sophisticated.
it's very simple.
I will give you simply three things. Just do these three things. You will see your sleep quota will come down dramatically.
very simple things
Extremely simple things that you just do for 10-15 minutes a day. You will see your sleep quota will come down dramatically.
I will give you something else, another three things
to do, very simple things, you do this
Your food quota can be brought down to at least thirty to forty percent of what you are eating
still maintain your weight
Maintain much more activity than you're maintaining right now and with much less sleep
So you engineer something
because you want to run it more efficiently
Running something inefficiently is not engineering
So I am a mother, I have a job and
I have things to do
Whatever you are. It doesn't matter
Whatever you are. It's important. Whatever the nature of your activity, you are doing something because you think it's important for you
if you are doing something
That's important for you
If you think your work is important the first and foremost thing that you should do is you should work upon yourself
Inner engineering is a systematic way of working upon yourself
Not just in the body
Not just in the mind, not just in the emotional level
But all aspects - your body, mind, emotion and energy - if all these things are
aligned and organized properly, this machine will work so much more efficiently. So the amount of sleep that you need,
the amount of food that you need, the volume of rest that the body demands can be brought down considerably.
At the same time the volume of activity can be greatly enhanced and made more efficient and more effective
especially
if you're a mother
Your responsibility is not just for making your life work well.
Now you've taken the responsibility of making one or two more lives
their lives to work well
when you
Dare to take such a responsibility
I think you must do inner engineering there is no choice for you. If you are not a mother you could choose maybe
but if you are a mother, you have no choice, you must
Questioner: Sadhguru I read in one of your question answer sessions that
you were referring that even meditation is not the thing, like I mean,
maybe it's a confusion to me right
Buddha didn’t meditate much though his followers did for,
I mean it's just a state of ecstasy which people get into.
Is it that
of course I meditate and get the feeling of bliss and ecstasy
and it remains throughout the day.
Is that enough for a spiritual journey? I'm a bit confused.
Sadhguru: It's enough incentive.
It's only an incentive
ecstasy is only an incentive.
If it is… if it’s painful would you do it?
No.
So you feel blissful and ecstatic,
that’s only an incentive; that’s not the goal.
So Buddha was ecstatic?
No.
Buddha was never ecstatic.
Did you ever see him dancing?
He just sat like this, that’s different.
If I ask you to sit like that, would you sit?
No.
You need some incentive;
so just creating that sweetness in the system is an incentive.
And above all, if you are feeling ecstatic within yourself,
you become a better human being, isn’t it?
Aren’t you?
When you’re very happy aren’t you a wonderful human being?
Only when you're unhappy you're a nasty human being, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
When you're happy you're a wonderful human being, everybody is, isn’t it?
So keeping you ecstatic - a dose of ecstasy in the morning,
the world is feeling better.
If everybody in Hyderabad started off in an ecstatic way in the morning,
Hyderabad would be a wonderful place, isn’t it?
They start with (gestures) tension,
so its something else is happening.
So ecstasy is not the goal of meditation;
it is just an incentive to keep you going;
because otherwise you wouldn’t go.
So what is meditation?
The purpose of, if we have to look at the purpose
if you sit in meditation slowly it will become like this:
your body’s here, your mind is out there,
what is you is somewhere else.
Once these three things are happening separately,
once there is a space between you and the body,
between you and the mind
this is the end of suffering.
Once the fear of suffering is taken away,
only then you will keep your instinct of self-preservation down;
otherwise you won't keep it down.
As long as the fear of suffering is there,
you will not keep the instinct of self-preservation down.
The only reason why you are naturally not spiritual is
because you’ve empowered your instinct of self-preservation too much.
All the time it is trying to make you like a bubble in the world,
separate bubble.
Not willing to mix with anything.
So unless you keep your instinct of self-preservation down,
you will not become spiritual in any way.
You will not know life as one happening.
You will always be an individual, trapped.
Have you noticed,
even in your general life,
when you're very happy you keep your guards down?
Isn’t it so?
When you're unhappy - fully shielded.
When you're happy - little down, isn’t it?
When you're very happy, it's all down.
Have you noticed this?
So this is the reason why you're willing to be happy only among certain people. (Laughs)
Because you don’t know how to be just happy
and still know where to stop life when it has to be stopped.
You're willing to be happy only with five people in your life
because you think that is the only safe atmosphere where you can be happy;
because you have always understood happiness as a certain vulnerability.
See just see you walk on the street and you smile at anybody,
they’ll look like this. (gestures)
Why?
What's their problem smiling back at you? (Laughs)
What are they going to lose?
They think, ‘If I smile, he may exploit me.’
How will he exploit you?
If he comes to pick your pocket, you can stop him.
If he smiles, even a pick pocket smiles at you,
why can't you smile at him?
What is the problem?
Just try today and see, just go out and smile;
people will look like this (gestures)
they’re… they're surprised; somebody’s making me vulnerable to life.
They want to go on the street like rocks,
they want to go home and become life.
Doesn’t work.
After some time you become a rock there also. (Laughs)
If you want to be life, you must practice it everywhere, isn’t it?
So meditation gives you that space between you and your body,
between you and your mind.
Whatever suffering human beings have known,
it has either entered them through the body or through the mind.
Do you know any other kind of suffering?
There are only two kinds of suffering, isn’t it?
Once you have a distance from these two things
this is the end of suffering.
Once the fear of suffering is taken away,
only then you're willing to venture into other dimensions of life;
otherwise no matter what I tell you,
you're only looking for safety.
Sadhguru: It's just
Body is a play of five elements,
so is the world,
so is the universe.
Everything is a play of five elements.
In these five
unless you want to explore mystical dimensions
you don’t have to bother about the space.
So there’re only four.
Among the four
seventy two percent of your body is just water.
Another twelve percent is earth,
you know only twelve percent of your body is actually earth,
largely it is water.
So it's eighty-four percent.
Another six percent is air;
air is the easiest thing to manage and take charge of
because there is breath
and you can take charge of it in a certain way.
Another four percent is fire.
Taking mastery over fire could do many things to you
but because you are house-holders living in family situation,
you don’t have to take charge of fire.
You can keep it as it is;
sometimes you can burn somebody a bit.
You need it right?
You’re married (Laughs).
Once in a way if you don’t burn them a bit,
it may not work.
Yes or no?
The remaining six percent is space;
you don’t have to bother about that
unless you want to explore mystical dimensions of the existence.
To live well
four elements is enough,
fifth one is not relevant for people
who just want to live well.
It's very important
because every substance,
all the four elements have memory;
particularly earth and water have a very strong sense of memory.
Today modern science has explored this in a big way
and they are proving to you
that water has tremendous memory.
Particularly about water, much research has happened.
If I go to a new place
something sensitive,
something important if I go,
I don’t go and talk to the local guide;
I’ll just look for an unbroken rock,
something that’s not been touched and broken;
I just go and sit.
I know everything about the place
because there is a phenomenal memory out there.
So with water.
When water behaves in a certain way,
depending upon what type of memory it carries;
it's from this,
people are going to consecrated spaces or temples
and dying for a few drops of water
because the water has the memory of the divine.
They want that water to get into them,.
that’s what theerth means.
Threerth means water which has the memory of the divine.
You want that water
which has a good memory to go into you.
So always your grandmothers were aware of this.
Tthey told you
‘if somebody gives you water,
first you must look at their face
not what they’re giving you.
Ssomebody gives you something to eat
don’t look at the food,
look at the person, how are they giving it?.’
They need not chemically poisoned this,
just with the emotion and thought things can go bad.
So this is no more a grandmother story;
this is scientifically proven now
that this happens that water has memory.
You can either turn this sweet or make it bitter with your rubbish.
If you can cause sweetness and bitterness
for the water which is in this tumbler,
can't you do this to the water that is here?
So if you just make the waters within you sweet,
you’ll become seventy two percent okay.
Okay? (Laughs)
Another twelve percent of earth if you do,
eighty-four percent, you are doing great.
Air, if you maintain it,
ninety percent you’re doing great.
Fire, if you want to purify,
it's much more work,
it's much …it takes much more to purify the fires in you.
Fire is in different ways.
We call this
There are various aspects of fire,
there is reproductive fire,
there is digestive fire,
there is mental fire,
there is heart fire
and there is inner fire.
There’re five dimensions of fire.
These five are difficult to work for ordinary people.
It takes lot of discipline
but the three can be worked out.
The reproductive fire,
the digestive fire
and the mental fire can be worked out very easily –
very easily means; with little effort one can do that.
Tthe other two will take much more to work with.
If you just purify these fires
then you are no more an ordinary person.
You’re not just a healthy, happy person you are much more
because once you have mastery over the fire element in you
then you’re touching the space.
You’re just one step away;
suddenly you are not just an ordinary human being,
you are not just happy and healthy human being;
something else is burning with you
which is not
Most people in the world will never know that
or till now they have not.
Our objective is everybody should know it.
If you took charge of the fire in your groin,
the fire in your belly
and the fire in your mind
how many miraculous things you could do with this life?
How much mastery you would have
and how…how well you could live,
how consciously
and how much by choice you could live
rather than be a slave of compulsiveness, isn't it?
Yes?
This is not about denying yourself this or that.
Tthis is just about everything happens by choice for you
not by compulsion.
So taking charge of the elements is the most fundamental form of yoga
and all yoga,
whatever kind of yoga
everything is an offshoot of bootha suddhi,
either,
it is in…it is on the track
or it's gotten distorted
but everything is an offshoot of this.
Questioner: I learnt a simple process in Osho, which says that you know,
whenever doubt arises in our life, you know,
doubt the doubt
and whenever trust arises, trust the trust.
My question is now that the ultimate,
next step we are saying,
the ultimate as the final step,
I would like to ask is dissolution or what we call moksha,
hmm?
That is one area, which you know, I don’t know how to take a, you know, step forward.
I don’t know whether I… my question is clear.
Sadhguru: You want to dissolve (Laughter)? Okay.
Questioner: That is the ultimate process.
Sadhguru: You need a barrel of sulphuric acid (Laughter).
Please, sit down.
Vinita Bali: Okay, can we have s
Sadhguru: No, we will answer that question.
Vinita Bali: Should we take one or two other questions, if you are okay with that?
Sadhguru: But you won’t get this kind of a question (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: (Laughs) The reason why the so-called spiritual process
has fallen upon ridicule in the world is
well, there may be few entrepreneurs who do their own things, leave them,
I’m not going into that
but the reason why spiritual process has become ridiculous on the planet is
because people try to do the highest things on the street side,
without the necessary committed atmosphere,
without the necessary focus,
simply talk about mukti, moksha. You know,
in the previous generation, everybody talked about mukti, moksha, just about anywhere,
sitting, standing.
Whenever life became miserable, they want moksha,
when it’s going well, they forget about moksha (Laughs).
Their idea of moksha itself is convoluted.
So this is important.
With all due respect to everybody who has spoken about these things,
maybe those things were spoken in a certain atmosphere to a certain individual
towards a certain purpose.
I think it’s quite irresponsible first of all to print that in a book
and just everybody reads it,
without knowing the context of what it is,
without having gon… gone through the journey that person who asked that question has go… gone through.
The question doesn’t have depth.
Answers we can give any number,
all you will do is you’ll pick up more words from today evening
and it’s not going to do anything.
If you are serious about it,
if you’re really serious about it,
if you’re serious about your journey,
leave all this.
First of all, get rid of all the jargon,
all the spiritual jargon.
Just come to this much
how much of you is sense,
how much of you is nonsense?
Sit down, unprejudiced just make an evaluation, just an accountant’s job, okay?
How much of you is
let me use the right, appropriate word – sense and how much of you is nonsense.
Every day, sieve it out, you will see it’s not an easy job
and ask some of you… two friends of yours and two people who don’t like you (Laughter),
also to assess you.
You know, you need a outside opinion, isn’t it?
Second opinion (Laughs) is always good.
You will see it’s a great cleansing process.
Instead of talking mukti, moksha, dissolution, sushupthi, something else, something else
these are all words.
Anybody can pick up Sanskrit words, what is the point?
Let’s take
All the scriptures, all the teachings, all the philosophies, all the great things
that people have spoken about,
all of them are worth nothing,
compared to a single existential te… step that you took inward.
If you take one step,
it is worth more than all the scriptures in the universe put together (Applause
[Sadhguru] In the last two days I have had the opportunity of being in two different places
of two different kinds, but with the same intention but two different kinds.
I was at the Thanjavur temple and yesterday I was also at the Gangaikonda Cholapuram.
All of you have seen both the places? Have you? No?
So Thanjavur is a temple where externally they managed to build a
magnificent temple of phenomenal beauty and proportion, a thousand years ago,
when there were no machines, there were no cranes, when there were
no vehicles to transport huge rocks that were necessary to build this temple.
All by the dint of man's effort; it's not a simple effort if you
if you want to understand what kind of effort, I'll give you a simple project.
Now we're building the Adi Yogi Alayam. So I want the rock which is
in the Spandha Hall to be shifted to the Adi Yogi Alayam. I want you to do it
all of you together. No machines. You know the rock?
Then you will understand what it is; because that's what they did.
They say the rock that was used to make the linga was brought from Saurashtra,
in Gujarat, from the banks of Narmada, weighing almost 250 tonnes of
raw stone, crossing Vindhyachal. No trucks. I want you to just imagine
what kind of people are these? What was in their heart to propel them into such
an almost impossible acts. So after all that effort, they built a magnificent temple
but the core of the temple failed, they could not consecrate the linga
as they wanted. It did not work.
So even today, people believe misfortune will come upon them by going
to this temple. You know, it's common knowledge, people think
you will come to misfortune if you go to Thanjavur temple,
which is not wholly correct but partially correct, because it's a kind of a
a distorted energy form; it did not find completion. So almost 42 years of work
and then the very heart of it failed upon them. So Raja Raja Cholan
who attempted this;... The only intention of building such a magnificent structure is
to see that generations of people will benefit, that it will leave an impact on people
that it will be an uplifting experience for generations of people to come.
When it did not happen, I can imagine his distress and pain of that wasted effort;
not just of the individual effort but thousands and thousands of people would
have worked for it, they would have emptied the state's coffers,
probably they fought battles to bring in the necessary resource and in the end
did not find completion.
So his son probably wanting to bring some peace to his dead father,
he built an exact replica of that temple but he did not have the courage
to attempt the same scale probably for practical purposes.
He brought down the size considerably, attempted similar thing,
trying to do it in a much faster time span. So making it into not so glorious work
of art but functionally as good. So the temple structure did not turn out
as it should have. They piled up rock and built it, structurally it's good
but in terms of aesthetics they could not match Thanjavur temple,
but they managed to consecrate the linga.
So one place where there is grandeur and beauty on the outside,
but the inner core did not work, another place there is inner strength
but there is no grandeur and beauty on the outside.
This has been the story of the world in many ways - where there is outside well-being
and affluence, inner emptiness; where there is inner strength and beauty,
poverty and other kinds of things where the outside is not taken care of.
A time has come in terms of where the world is that in terms of the outside situations
we are capable like never before, as human beings. We're capable of doing things
which were unimaginable hundred years ago. Now that we have an external
capability of this kind, it's extremely important that we don't become another
Thanjavur as each individual - outside beautiful, inside empty.
As individual people, as societies, as nations, as humanity, we should not end up
like this unfinished temple. And... I was trying to go through the whole drama
in my mind; I was trying to go through the whole drama.
What it would have taken for them to build this temple and how it would have felt
to see it incomplete, and how much pain this young king, Raja Raja Cholan's son
must have borne to hurriedly try to put up another temple, which is of similar design
but of a much smaller scale and trying to bring it alive.
The whole drama I tried to play it in my head and it's quite a trauma.
It's life and it's very, you know, very large-scale, enormous magnitude;
people playing out their life in a very large-scale scape and the pain of not being
able to fulfill that and the longing and desire to fulfill that; a fulfillment
which is not of the personal kind. It is seen as a,... as something that you have to do
for the people around you. This is a struggle and a pain and the fulfillment that
every human being who longs to create something of phenomenal proportions
to happen in this world.... Not everybody meets success.
Not everybody experiences the scale of failure that this great king might have experienced.
So at this juncture, where humanity is compelled to make decisions about
scaling down their exterior, not because of their own consciousness
but because of ecological compulsions, a time has come when humanity
has to scale down its outside grandeur substantially if they want to live for a long time.
If we as a species, if we as a race have to exist on this planet for long enough,
a time has come we have to cut down our plans for the outside.
So when such a time has come, it's best - because you cannot curb human aspirations
in terms of wanting to do great things - so it's very important that we start
rolling out grand plans for the interiority, otherwise a human being will feel
trapped that he cannot find expression to his creativity, he cannot find
expression to his wanting to do something more than what he's right now.
So it is definitely time to roll out plans, very mega scale plans about the interiority
of the human being. But even for that we need some outside infrastructure
which we are trying to fulfill in the next coming couple of years, a year or two,
and we want to roll out really grand plans for every human being as to
what you can do within yourself. There are incredible things that one can do
within himself, which can easily keep a human being busy for a lifetime,
and if you keep -... if you do such incredible things, at least you will not have
the problem of planning one more lifetime, because if you do such incredible things,
then existence will see that you have to cease, you're too much.
We need lots of people right now at this juncture to stand up.
It doesn't matter what you're capable of, what you're not capable of,
all that it takes is... because as far as I am concerned - I'm not concerned about
people's talent, we know how to manufacture talent, but that is possible only
if you subject yourself without any will of your own to the process.
We can make anything out of you. We have the necessary technology.
So we are not really looking for talent. If you have talent it's useful.
If you don't have any, but if you are -... if you have unwavering commitment
or devotion, you're much more useful because now talent can be manufactured,
anything can be built. If you have that one steady foundation in you,
that your commitment and devotion does not waver, if that one foundation is there,
we can build any kind of structure upon that. I'm looking forward to see a display
of that kind of commitment and devotion in the coming few months
because we're looking at building things, which are of, which will be of
immense value to human life on this planet, but that cannot be done
without the fundamental stability that the focus of your life does not change
even for a moment. If it changes it loosens everything.
You cannot build a structure on a moving foundation. Hmm?
You can only build it on a stable foundation. I hope lot of you, or many of you,
will work towards that, to bring that stability within yourself so that
we can create and offer something of value to yourself and everybody around you.
(K.V.Kamath): I know you have very interesting use in it, greed.
Greed, I am talking of in the corporate context
and we will explore many hues as we go along, of greed,
but I am sure we would all be very curious to hear your views.
(Sadhguru): If you use the word ‘greed’,
what it means is you are operating market economy
with communism going around in your head.
Only if you are a communist you can talk about greed.
If you are market economy don’t talk about greed,
talk about better laws.
If somebody is making a billion dollars per day,
let’s tax him, nine hundred million you can tax him
and that will be distributed anyway,
but enough to give him incentive to go on,
not to take away his spirit.
So this is how capitalism is managed,
here you don’t talk about –
this whole Corporate Social Responsibility,
I think it’s funny,
it is just an eyewash.
Instead of that, the government, if the administration
if he has the necessary sense,
you can bring the right kind of policies
where businesses can grow unbridled,
but it will naturally benefit the rest of the society.
This can be done with simple laws,
taxation and other kinds of laws.
Business laws can do this,
there is no need to talk about service,
there is no need to talk about greed.
Everybody can live with dignity.
Because if you are at the receiving end of the service,
you’ll lose your dignity,
if you are at the giving end of the service
you go to heaven, both are wrong.
(K.V.Kamath): What I hear Sadhguru saying is
profit is a good motive and
if you call it greed, that greed is good and
(Sadhguru): Greed is good.
(K.V.Kamath): I think that is something that profit is something that
(Sadhguru): No, if you look at the definition of greed
what is greed?
See, for somebody who is walking to his work place
or his home,
somebody who rides a bicycle
and refuses to take him on the bicycle is greedy man.
Somebody who is riding a bicycle sees a man driving a Maruti car and he thinks he is greedy.
Just single man driving a Maruti car,
he could take me, his family and
my family in the Maruti car
because Indians are able to squeeze, you know.
A man who was driving a Maruti car,
when a Mercedes or a BMW whizzes past him,
he says, ‘Vulgarity of greed!’
A man who was driving BMW looks at a man
who is driving a Bugatti and he thinks that is greed.
So who is to set this definition for what is greed?
I am saying once you have chosen market economy,
there is no room for that vocabulary in your life,
you understand greed is the driving force.
Now it is for the laws to manage the greed
so that your greed benefits everybody else.
There is a… there is a
In African lore there is a saying,
‘When the lion feeds, everybody else gets fed.’
So if you’re a lion, you have a big capability.
When you feed, it is the laws which should make it in such a way,
if you make profit, everybody should live well.
Instead of talking about greed and service and corporate social responsibility,
I don’t know why they are deviating themselves into all this
(KV.Kamath): So stay focused on maximizing profitability.
(Sadhguru): Yes.
(K.V.Kamath): Tax appropriately and let everybody accrue
the word celibacy does not describe
Or does not is not [the] translation for Brahmacharya
Brahmacharya means Brahman the Ultimate Charya means the path
You're on the path of ultimate
That is Brahmacharya
Celibacy is talking only about the physical aspect of holding yourself back from
a natural urge which is going on in the body and more [in] the mind
So celibacy is not the right thing to [say] when we say Brahmacharya
what it means is
You are working to organize your energies in such a way
[that] your joy your love everything that you need is within yourself
You have enough experience to know that nobody
however dear they may be
Is 24 hours reliable?
yes or no?
all of you have enough experience in life to know that
however dear and wonderful they are
Nobody in the world is reliable 24 hours of the time to maintain your love
 and enjoy
Have you realized that or you still hoping?
So it's out of this wisdom
because if one wants to
Really know higher dimensions of life
One thing that is necessary is that within you there is a constant sense of peacefulness
And joyfulness if this is not there, then you will go up to something
if you don't feel
steadily peaceful and Joyful
Then you will do compulsive activity of trying to be happy
So a Brahmacharya is somebody who's trying to [organise] energy in a such a way that
To be peaceful and joyful is all his own
He's not going to lean on anybody for that
Have all the Brahmacharya reached there. That's not the point ,they're working towards it
They need support. They need atmosphere to make that happen for [themself]. It's not a small task that they have taken up
If once a
Human beings way has become like this that his peace his
Love his joy is not dependent on anybody he has the necessary background
To spring up [to] another dimension
if this is not there
He will naturally get entangled in compulsive activity
So Brahmacharya on one level fundamentally means
To move from being a compulsive human being to a conscious human being
You may decorate your compulsiveness with all kinds of romance around it
But do you see it's a compulsive behavior?
Yes, it is not Conscious behavior
You may have the whole world with you. It doesn't matter, but it is a compulsive behavior
You can read points about it. you can write good (great) stories about it. you can make movies about it.
But fundamentally its a compulsive behavior
Which you're trying to cloth in so many beautiful clothes just to
Not face the reality.I'm not trying to take all the romance out of your life
once someone understands that
If I'm involved in compulsive activity I will never go where I want to go. isn't it so?
Yes
If one is compulsive in his life
there is no question of he having a goal to reach or
attaining a certain state or whatever
compulsiveness means a very deep sense of slavery. isn't it?
So one who has realized this naturally seeks to become conscious
So it is from this understanding that
We say if you really wanting to make a journey
You should drop your compulsiveness and bring consciousness to every aspect of your life
So that is Brahmacharya
Celibacy is an ugly word
Because without the necessary
Understanding or necessary sadhana or energy, you're just trying to hold yourself back
then you will suffer
If [your] energies were organized in such a way that all the time you're high
Really high within yourself. you won't lean on anybody for these things. isn't it?
Oh, I'm not like that right now. what to do? as i
Told you these [things] don't come unless you
Make some effort toward it
One can go through life
With a compulsive patterns without much effort you can allow the life to carry on.
I know right now the new age philosophies say let it flow.
I don't know what they're letting flow anyway?
see
being a part of life
Being involved in the process of life on the surface is one thing at the core is another thing
Nature is on two different levels
one aspect of Nature
Knows nothing other than self preservation and procreation
This is the surface of the nature
your own nature if you take. If you take the nature of this body
It knows only self preservation and procreation. It doesn't know anything else.
So if you go by your physical nature. Naturally this is all that you can  to
survival and procreation
Eating, sleeping, reproducing and dying. That's all that will happen if you go with the ways of the body.
But at the same time there is another nature within you which is longing to Expand
if you give it the whole existence if you gobble up and still be hungry. Yes?
You have that or not?
If you feed the whole existence to this one, it'll gobble up everything and still be hungry for more
So there is another dimension of nature within you which wants to expand in an unbounded way.
Which one do you give into?
Is subject of who you are?
if you give into the physical nature.
All you will know is just this
If you give in to the inner nature which wants to become boundless then the life is different.
so if you have given in
or if you have seen the waves of the inner nature are far beyond the ways of the physical nature,
Naturally you will choose to create a situation in your life that is conducive for that it is from this understanding
That Brahmacharya or sannyasis became a part of spiritual process.
Celibacy is a western idea that is just to imitate the yogis of the past
All these things have been picked up at random by people. If you are not aware of this? Even
Six to eight thousand years ago Indian Yogis travel all over Europe and Arabia
They established many things
even when the phoenicians were building things in
Arabia.
They were setting up their empire. Even then the Indian architects, the indian sculptures, the indian elephants  and the Indian Yogis
went. That's almost 5-6 thousand years ago.
If a team of elephants, labours, sculptures, architect and yogis have to be there. There must have been a much longer
association before that. isn't it? its an only team that ended up there in those days.
so wherever they went, they
did
create some awareness of
What is the significance of their way of life?
So people picked this up at random without the necessary understanding.
that is how celibacy became a part of other cultures
What came from very deep understanding. Just the surface of it they took.
That will happen everywhere. See the yoga. Right now, yoga means just twisting a body. Just the surface.
Chelameshwar: I suppose so long as human beings being what they are and the society is ,
they are certainly bound to be certain things
which are right and certain things…certain
acertain conduct which are right and certain conduct which is not right.
Now I don’t think anybody will contribute to the
proposition that corruption is right by …from any point of view.
Sadhguru: Let me tell you.
Chelameshwar: Somebody sitting in a public office, making money, using his office.
Sadhguru: Let me tell you.
See you are calling it corruption.
I have… I have had the unfortunate privilege of
sometimes moving closely with the people whom you consider corrupt.
Okay?
Chelameshwar:All right. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: And you will be amazed
you will be amazed and –
initially it was shocking to me but when I really looked through them,
I see their reasoning.
They don’t think they’re corrupt. (Laughter)
I tell you.
They don’t think they’re corrupt.
They… they just say everybody would do the same thing.
I got the opportunity, they don’t have the opportunity. (Laughter)
So they are only complaining that they don’t have the opportunity.
So what is corruption,
what is not corruption itself is not defined.
I am not trying to give a (an?) escape route for all these people,
who are doing horrible things to the nation.
So the only thing that can fix this country,
in terms of corruption is
we need people who have a huge passion for this nation.
Okay?
So right now we need somebody who is capable
and who has great passion for this nation.
That is the only way –
it is not all problems will be fixed –
that is the only way we start moving towards a solution.
Right now, we are heading for a big problem,
because what holds a nation together,
everybody must understand –
if you want to run a nation - whatever the nation,
you must understand what is it that binds the people?
There is some passion because nation is just an idea.
It is not a reality, let’s understand this.
Nation is just an idea.
What is it that binds all the people as one nation,
that idea and that passion has to be constantly strengthened.
If you constantly keep weakening it
and then try to hold the nation together, you will not succeed.
This is the time
this generation of people have this responsibility
that if we do not change the trajectory of this nation the way it’s going right now,
there will be no one ‘India’ in another fifty years of time.
It may not take fifty years.
Chelameshwar: But how does this generation do it?
Sadhguru: See ‘how’ is not one aspect alone.
There’re many aspects to it.
See it’s all right where people wear imported watches, imported clothes,
but they shouldn’t import their brains and hearts from somewhere else.
It’s very important. (Laughs)
And that is happening in the form of our education.
In the way we are culturing ourselves.
There is nothing wrong with anything that comes from outside the country,
we must take the best that comes from everywhere from the world.
That is the nature of any evolving, growing society.
But at the same time, what holds us together as a nation should not be sacrificed.
If you sacrifice that you won’t be able to hold it together.
People will not stay together.
You know you can’t hold three, four brothers together.
Unless you bind them emotionally and create a passion towards something,
you can’t bind them together.
If the parents did not take care of that, you can’t hold them together.
They will go away somewhere. If they live far away, they won’t fight.
If they come close, they will be in your court. (Laughter)
You must understand what holds the nation together.
The basic thing that held this nation together
was always that - in this nation,
we did not believe this nor that.
Only thing is we knew we have to become free.
Liberation was the highest goal.
If you keep it that way,
if you manage to activate this back in the society
you will see people will stay together.
Otherwise every group will form its own belief systems
and they will all go separate.
You can’t keep them together.
At the very birth of this nation, we broke into three pieces.
Every hundred years, we may come to it
or less,
if we do not take care of a few fundamentals.
Chelameshwar: And what measures are to be taken to
create that atmosphere where people work towards that goal?
Sadhguru:It’s best that what you’re strong on, you build on that.
You don’t try to build on America
United States of America in India - it’s never going to work.
You build an India in India,
a strong powerful India you can build.
The North American people are there the way they are
because they came there for a different reason
and they came together for that reason
and that reason is working for them.
Here it’s not like that.
This is a completely different reality.
You’re trying to super-impose another reality upon yourself.
That will not work.
This is not against anything,
this is not for anything.
I am speaking English language, amn’t I?
So I am not against anything for that matter
but I am for that which works.
I am against all those things which do not work.
Why do you want to invest time and life and people’s lives
in things that do not work?
we clearly know from my experience of working with village,
being in the villages,
I clearly know at least fifty to fifty-five percent of people,
their existence is like cattle,
not like human beings the quality of life.
Okay?
They are somehow managing, so we think they are okay.
So they’re somehow managing. That is not life.
After sixty-seventy years, two generations of people,
their lives are gone and if still we can’t find basic solutions
that means we’re doing something wrong, isn’t it?
Chelameshwar: And why do you think it didn’t work for sixty seven years?
What is your analysis and understanding of it?
Sadhguru: It’s essentially because of this.
We are trying to transform people from being Indian to being English.
Do you understand?
English language is the only thing we should have picked up
because that’s the passport to the world.
I am saying what we pick up… if you go shopping,
what you pick up from a shop is by choice.
If you pick up compulsively or you buy whatever they’re selling,
it’s a stupid thing.
So the idea of MahatmaGandhi and the rest of the clan fighting for freedom
and getting the British out was,
so that we could choose what we want to do with our lives.
We did not choose because we were lethargic
or we were just overwhelmed
or we were just… our idea of superiority was
you know misplaced.
We somewhere thought anybody who conquers must be superior.
We just tried to implement that system as it is,
including the judiciary everything as it is.
See I am not talking about traditional values.
I am not talking about India being an isolated nation doing its own thing.
No.
As I said earlier, if you go shopping,
you must choose what you want.
You must not take whatever the salesman is pushing on you.
Something is fifty percent discount, so you don’t buy it.
You will buy something that you need, isn’t it?
So even from the rest of the world, the same thing.
You pick up what is going to be good for us.
You don’t pick up something that they’re peddling to us.
So what they don’t need they would like to peddle to you.
You should have the sense not to take it in.
You must take in what we need and what’ll work for us.
English language works for us.
Oh we picked it up.
May be we didn’t pick it up, it was thrust upon us,
it doesn’t matter but somehow it worked out for us.
Everything else, you must see.
From a simple thing to anything –
I was… you know… there is a classic example –
The tribal school close to the Ashram where we have been working.
First I went there about fifteen years ago to see
we thought we will, you know, participate in this school in some way
and I wanted to see how the children are.
I went there and all these kids
there were just about eleven, twelve kids in the school,
and they are all wearing ties.
The ties are worn here (Gestures)like a necklace,
okay - long string and tie here. (Laughs)
So I said first thing is ‘remove these damn ties.
Why these children are hanging this tie here on the chest and walking around? (Laughs)
This is not a necklace.’
But the kids don’t know what’s the difference.
Something you have to wear like this, they know only this and they are wearing it.
In Tamil Nadu, if you wear a tie in the summer, it’s as good as a noose you know. (Laughter)
I am saying - from something so simple
what food to eat,
what is comfortable in tropical weather,
what is the best thing to eat,
what is the best thing to wear is something that we have to look at, isn’t it?
You just don’t have to imitate somebody,
simply because they managed to conquer you.
They did not conquer you because they were superior people.
They had gun powder and you didn’t.
That’s all.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Can the human clone become a spiritual?
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Now whatever you want to call it
it doesn’t matter what you call it,
you’re just producing a human body which is alive
means the life process is there with all the ingredients.
I am only talking about when still women are able to bear children
I don’t see why you’re wasting billions of dollars in a laboratory.
There is a pleasurable way of creating children (Laughter/Applause).
You don’t have to make it so obscene and ugly in test-tubes and this and that
and you come out of that
no.
And above all a woman does not just give body to the child,
she molds the child,
and how she molds the child depends entirely on how she is.
You must see the elaborate care that they used to take in this country.
Once a woman conceives every step how she should do,
what she should do,
what she should not do,
whose face she should see,
whose face she should not see because everything has an influence.
You’re not only giving it a body, you’re also molding the consciousness of the person that you’re bringing up
and this is
Do not think in terms of reproduction.
You must understand you’re manufacturing the next generation of people.
How the world will be tomorrow is determined right now in your body.
It’s a tremendous responsibility.
It needs to be handled that way.
Because we know how to do a few fanciful things,
everything that we learn to do, we don’t have to do.
This is the source of destruction on this planet.
Everything we are capable of do… doing we must do
because we are still juvenile.
As a humanity we’ve not matured in our minds.
“Everything I can do I must do” - not necessary.
We must be able to take a decision what to do, what not to do,
what is needed and what's not needed, isn't it? (Applause)
Are you a clone by the way? (Laughter)
Sadhguru: The very process of our birth is connected to these cycles.
You know that clearly
the feminine cycles and our birth is very directly connected.
Apart from that,
this twelve-and-a-quarter,
somewhere between eleven-and-three-fourths to twelve-and-a-quarter is one solar cycle -
it varies a little bit.
If you complete seven cycles of the solar system
If you complete seven solar cycles,
you will complete one-thousand-and-eight lunar cycles.
That is,
if you live for eighty-four years and three months,
you would have completed seven solar cycles
and one-thousand-and-eight lunar cycles.
If you just manage to live that long… (Laughs)
I may be encouraging lot of rubbish now. (Laughter)
If you just manage to live
to complete seven solar cycles and one-thousand-and-eight lunar cycles,
then you can break a certain bond with the earth.
Your bond with the planet is broken largely.
And very easily,
with very little assistance,
even if you know nothing about anything,
with very little assistance,
you can go beyond the cycles of birth and death.
Because your bond with the planet and the material of the planet,
the memory of which you carry within you
and the memory of you
the material also carries; you will break that bond.
Once this bond is broken, then the work that needs to be done is very simple.
When people say the salt of the earth,
it has more meaning than most people understand.
You are the salt of the earth.
This whole body is just a small blob which has just popped out of this planet
what you call as myself right now is just a little blob of earth
which just splashes out and falls back
and this keeps happening
because there is a bond between the planet and you.
The energies that you refer to as myself
and the material which has become the manifestation of yourself,
these two things have gotten linked.
It’s a very deep
It’s a very profound relationship.
But if you complete seven cycles of the sun and
Not ‘and,’
along with that you complete one-thousand-and-eight lunar cycles,
then your bond with the planet is largely broken.
From there on,
it becomes very simple.
With a very small push, it could be done.
So, if you have not done anything right,
all you have to do is torment the world with eighty-four years of you (Few Laugh)
and
Because ultimately it’s only the result that matters.
Piyush Pandey:So let me start off, Sadhguru,
by asking you that
you probably are the biggest multi--tasker that I have met in my life.
You are into sharing wonderful things with people, –
millions of people,
and you find the time too to play golf
and you ride a motorcycle like a champion,.
I don’t know what all you do.
How do you manage your time because…?
Sadhguru: That last thing was not a good thing (Laughter). .
“I don’t know what all you do.” – not a good thing (Both laugh).
Piyush Pandey: No, that is a sense of amazement (Laughter).
And there are people, who are very busy people,
and so we believe we are busy people.
We would like to know as to how you manage your time
and what is the kind of advice you would like to give us,
so that life beyond work is a lot more meaningful?
at least little more meaningful than what we lead,
a little closer to the kind of meaningful life that you lead.
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs)! From what I observe from people,
as I travel more and more,
meet various kinds of people in business,
academics,
science
and regular people all over the world,, –
what I see is, -
most people,, in the twenty- four hours that we have per day,
they are more pre-occupied than busy.
That is,
their own thoughts and their own emotions are such a big issue,
that most of their time is spent dealing with that.
They may be working but in their work,
a lot of struggles are within themselves.
If you are in any kind of sport or any creativity,
you would know that
a little struggle means
your ball will go somewhere else,
your ragam, thalam will go somewhere else,
your painting will go somewhere else,
nothing will happen properly.
Or in other words,
what could happen very simply,
unfortunately happens with lots of difficulty.
This is mainly because
they have been given a phenomenal gadget
or a phenomenal machine,
which is the human mechanism,
above all a phenomenal dimension called the mind.
They are trying to operate this phenomenal machine,
or a gadget,
or a computer, if you would (Laughs) like to call it,
without reading the user’s manual.
Every day, struggling with their own stuff.
and it doesn’t get solved before they are twenty or something.
Till their last day (Laughs), on their death bed,
they are still struggling with the same things –,
their thoughts and their emotions.
If they learn to sort this out very early in their life,
I’m sure they can work half the number of hours that they’ are working
and be a lot more productive than the way they are right now.
My effort is to bring this possibility to people’s’ lives,
that you can (Laughs)… live life with ease, not with struggle.
One thing is, when we say work,
it's… many young people, wonderful people,
who a’re getting recognized for whatever wonderful things they have done.
Leaving them apart,
but generally, work means always been
people have been taught that they must work hard.
Nobody told them they must work joyfully.
Nobody told them their work should be an expression of their joy, or their love.
They have to work hard.
If you work hard, life will be tedious.
How else will it be?
You will do something hard
only because you don’t know how to do it.
If you know how to do it,
you would do it with ease (Laughs).
So without learning how to do something, if you try to do it,
without investing enough time in perception,
if life is all expression,
then life becomes a big struggle.
Most people are not doing anything except earning a living,
maybe reproducing and dying one day (Laughs)
Nothing more (Laughs).
They may believe they are doing many things but this is all they’re are doing -
Eating, sleeping, reproducing, dying one day.
That is such a big fuss.
Every other creature is able to do this.
From an earthworm, to an insect, to anything and anything,
everybody is doing this.
They all earn their own living.
They eat, they sleep, they reproduce and they die.
With one -millionth of our brain, they’ are able to do it.
With this big brain, human beings are struggling –,
not with the things that they’ are doing,
they’re are struggling with the brain itself.
Their own intelligence has become a serious problem.
What is the biggest boon in our life,
what is the greatest benefaction in our life, ,
which is our intelligence,,
this has become a problem because
they don’t know how to hold it;,
they don’t know how to use it.
Constantly, it works against themselves.
When I say it works against you,
people may call all kinds of names,,
may use all kinds of words to describe this.,
They may call it stress,
they may call it tension,
they may call it misery,
they may call it depression,
they may call it anxiety,
they may call it madness. ,
Essentially, it's your intelligence turned against you.
Your intelligence is not working for you, it's working against you.
So my fundamental work is this,
that at least your body and your mind should work for you.
Nobody else may work for you, it doesn’t matter (Laughs).
At least your body and your intelligence must work for you.
If this one thing happens,
you living blissfully, gracefully, effectively is a natural consequence.
Questioner: What’s… what’s for me the purpose of life,
if you can give an insight on that?
Thank you.
Sadhguru: Isn't it fantastic that if there is no purpose,
you have nothing to fulfill,
you can just live?
Hmm?
No,
but you want a purpose
and not a simple purpose, you want a God-given purpose. (Laughter)
It's very dangerous.
People who think they have a God-given purpose
are doing the cruelest things on the planet.
Yes or no?
They are doing the most horrible things
and they’ve always been doing the most horrible things
because when you have a God-given purpose,
life here becomes less important than your purpose.
No,
life is important.
Life is important -
when I say life,
I am not talking about your family, your work, what you do, what you do not do, you party
I am not talking about that as life.
This is life, isn't it?
Life is within you or around you?
The… the ambiance of life
you’re mistaking the ambiance of life for life.
Your home, your family, your workspace, your party
this is all ambiance of life.
This is not life, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You’re mistaking the ambiance for the real thing.
No.
Life is important
because it's the only thing you know,
you don't know anything else.
Do you know something else?
Rest is all imagined stuff, isn't it?
The only thing is that this is beating and alive and that's all there is.
So, is this important?
It is of paramount importance.
Not you as a person, that’s not important,
but you as a piece of life
it’s very important
because that is the basis of everything.
When I say that is the basis of everything,
the universe exists for you only because you are, isn't it?
Yes or no?
The world exists for you only because you are,
otherwise it won't exist in your experience.
So, in every way this is important.
So, what is the purpose for this?
See, if you had a purpose and if you’ve fulfilled it,
after that what would you do?
After that, what would you do?
Bored, isn't it?
It is just that life is so intricate and so phenomenally intricate
that if you spend a 10,000 years looking at it carefully,
you still will not know it entirely.
If you spend a million years looking at it with absolute focus,
still you will not know it in its entirety.
That’s how it is.
There is...…Is there a meaning to it?
The greatest thing about life is that there is no meaning to it.
This is the greatest aspect of life that it has no meaning to it
and there is no need for it to have a meaning.
It is the pettiness of one’s mind that it’ll seek a meaning
because psychologically you will feel kind of unconnected with life
if you don’t have a purpose and a meaning.
People are constantly trying to create these false purposes.
Now, they were quite fine and happy.
Suddenly, they got married.
Now the purpose is the other person.
Then they have children.
Now they become miserable with each other.
Now the whole purpose that I go through all this misery is because the children.
Like this, it goes on.
These are things that you’re causing
and holding these as purposes of life
and is there a God-given purpose?
What if God does not know you exist?
No, I am just asking, by chance. (Laughter)
I am saying in this huge cosmos,
for which God is supposed to be the Creator
and the manager of these hundred billion galaxies,
in that this tiny little planet
and you
Suppose he doesn’t know that you exist, what to do?
Possible or no?
I am sorry, I am saying such sacrilegious things
but is it possible or no?
What if he doesn’t know that you exist?
What if he doesn’t have a plan for you? (Laughter)
Suppose, he doesn’t have a plan for
an individual plan for you,
don’t look for such things.
The thing is the creation is made in such a way that
Creation and Creator cannot be separated.
Here you are a piece of creation.
At the same time, the source of creation is throbbing within you.
If you pay little attention to this process of life,
you would not need any purpose.
It’ll keep you engaged for a million years if you want.
There is so much happening
so much means so much unbelievable things are happening right here.
If you pay enough attention,
a million years of existence, it’ll keep you busy or more.
Right now, the need for purpose has come
because you’re trapped in your psychological structure,
not in your life process.
Psychologically your
your psychological structure functions from the limited data that it has gathered.
Within that it rolls and right now,
your thought and emotion has become far more important than your life. Isn't it so?
Isn't it so?
So, because of this you’re seeking a purpose as an escape from the trap
that you have set for yourself.
It is a trap set by you.
You can easily come out of it.
If the trap was set for you by somebody else,
difficult to come out
because they’ll set the trap in such a way that you cannot come out, isn't it?
I am… I am talking about life not marriage,
that’s what I mean. (Laughter)
That’s what. (Laughs)
So this is a trap set by you.
This is easy to come out,
but that is the whole thing.
Why it is so difficult is
now you’re identified with the trap,
you like it.
You like it because it gives you a certain sense of
safety and security and protection and individual identity.
If you build a cocoon around yourself,
it gives you safety,
but it also imprisons you.
Walls of self-preservation are also walls of self-imprisonment.
When it protects you, you like it.
When it restricts you, you do not like it.
That is why we have doors.
We like the walls because it's protecting us,
but we have doors so that we can open it and get out when we want to.
It doesn’t matter how nice it is, we still want to go out, isn't it?
So that is how it is with every trap that you set.
It doesn’t matter how nice it is, you still want to go out.
So, the psychological wall that you’ve built,
which gives you some sense of identity,
which gives you some sense of being a person
an individual person and which gives you security
beginning to experience it like a trap;
somewhere you want to break it.
So, one way of not breaking it is to find a purpose.
Those who find a purpose in their life,
they become so conceited.
They will live within their own trap forever
thinking that they’re doing the most fantastic thing.
First thing you need is balance.
If you have balance, then you can climb.
If you don’t have balance, it's better you stay on the ground”, isn't it?
It's not safe for somebody who is not balanced to climb high.
It's best you stay close to the ground.
You should not climb.
So, first thing is to establish a balance,
then you loosen your psychological structure,
then it's a wonderful thing.
If you are loosening your psychological structure without balance,
which lot of people are doing today
see, why does somebody want to drink alcohol or take a drug
because it loosens your psychological structure and makes you feel liberated for a moment
but without the necessary balance
you have not worked for the balance, but you got freedom.
Freedom without balance is destruction, anarchy, isn't it?
So, first thing is to work for balance,
an enormous sense of balance
where even if you dismantle your psychological structure,
you can simply live here.
Dismantling your psychological structure is an important process
because that is your trap,
that is your security,
that is your stability
at the same time, that’s your trap
because the walls are set, you feel secured, but that’s also your trap.
If you dismantle your trap,
you also dismantle your security, isn't it?
You also dismantle your sense of purpose.
You also dismantle everything that matters to you.
So, that will need balance.
Without balance, if you dismantle you’ll go crazy.
But, don’t look for a purpose
because if you look for a purpose, you are seeking madness.
If you find one, you are sure mad.
Yes. (Laughter)
If you think you’ve found a purpose in life,
you still… you’re for sure gone crazy
because only the insane people have purpose
or people who have a purpose are insane in many ways.
These are things that you create in your mind
and believe it's true, isn't it?
Right now - ‘fighting for my country is my purpose’
right now if it's necessary, I’ll fight knowing fully well it's an unnecessary bloody fight.
Yes.
Then you’ll fight only to the extent it's necessary.
If you think this is your purpose,
you would want to destroy the whole world for what nonsense you believe in, isn't it?
If something is needed, we will do it
with… with absolute involvement.
There’s no other purpose.
The purpose of life is to live and to live totally.
To live totally does not mean party every night. (Laughter)
To live totally means
before you fall dead, every aspect of life has been explored
nothing has been left unexplored.
Yes?
Before you fall dead, even if you do not explore the cosmos,
at least this piece of life (Referring to oneself) you must know it in its entirety.
That much you must do to yourself, isn't it?
That’s living totally that you experience the whole of this,
all dimensions of what this is. (Gestures)
You did not live anything untouched.
You just do that.
That will take a long time.
That’s …good enough purpose for you. (Laughs)
Devi Shetty: Sadhguru, I believe that
talent is something which is grossly exaggerated in success.
It’s… when I was in medical school
I used to teach martial art (Few Laugh).
That was my passion (Sadhguru Laughs)
and every time a Bruce Lee’s movie was released
all these school kids would come and join in hordes to martial art schools.
We used to call as ‘Bruce Lee phenomena…’
Sadhguru: They are gone after two weeks (Laughs).
Devi Shetty: Yes.
And I use to see some kids whose physique is meant for martial art,
who have the natural flair
and I used to think “Oh this kid is going to get a black-belt.”
And interestingly Swamiji after six months
they are never there.
The guys who go after the black-belt and you know
do something very good in martial art, are the ones
who join the school without any skills,
without any talent,
who worked very very hard,
for everything they had to sweat it out
but in the end, they are the ones who succeed.
How do you explain this phenomena?
Sadhguru: See, for variety of reasons
let me not go beyond this
for variety of reasons,
a certain individual could be born with a certain flair
physical flair,
mental flair,
emotional flair,
style - you know five-year-old child,
one has style,
other is clumsy, okay.
So the one with the style is not going to become necessarily a fashion thing,
somebody else who seems to be clumsy may grow into something else.
Like, you don't know
when a woman is pregnant,
the child within that womb
whether it's a sage or a sorcerer,
nor the woman knows
The mother does not know
whether she is producing a sage or a sorcerer or what.
This is because
I use the word coherence because of
modern science is using that word.
Who you are here right now,
as you sit here - this is physics.
Every subatomic particle is in constant contact with everything.
What you call as cosmos is living life
and it's a live mind.
You have captured only one small part of it.
If you work with only that one smart… small part of
what you have captured
both as life and as intelligence,
you will function at a certain level.
If you apply yourself to break the barriers of your limitations that you’ve set for yourself,
then there is an intelligence beyond anybody’s understanding,
beyond anybody’s estimate which is available to you.
Once this is available to you,
people think you are superhuman.
No,
this is not about being super human
this is about realizing that being human is super.
The immensity of being human has not been realized.
So we are always making
a kind of a mathematical calculation
“Okay if this person has this much IQ,
maybe this is what he will become.”
This is what Newton’s law,
that everything that moves on this planet
works to a mathematical precision
or a geometric precision
that is if you take a pendulum
the length of pendulum will decide how it will swing.
If you take a projectile, depending upon its mass, velocity and the trajectory,
it will go to a certain place.
That is not how the cosmos is working
because what you think is physical and not physical
is all mixed up within this.
Within this human being
the physical self,
the psychological self,
the emotional self
and who you call as myself, the life within you,
the fundamental life process
these are all different dimensions
and the innermost core of who you are which
because all the other words are corrupted,
I’ll use the word “Life” or just you -
what you call as me.
This, if you allow it,
if you do not identify it with any form
with your physical form
or with other different identities what you take on,
it has a… a way of being cohesive or collaborative with everything around.
When we say somebody worked hard,
all he is trying to do is stretch his boundary of identity, isn't it?
He is trying to stretch his boundary.
If he succeeds to stretch his boundary,
something that was… he never thought possible or imagined that is
within his competence or capability becomes his,
miraculously.
I can show you hundreds of people
who come to me,
we prepare them for a certain period
and then we initiate them.
In twenty-four hours
you will see the shape of their face will change,
genetics are altered in twenty-four hours’ time.
You can see the photographic images,
they have actually changed dramatically overnight,
simply because of a certain extension of their identity.
So in the Indian spiritual milieus,
when you say spiritual we must understand this –
this is not about looking up or looking down.
When we say spiritual,
we’re talking about
transcending the limitations of physical.
So right now
the physical is here as if it's a solid entity in people’s experience
but modern physics is telling you
and medical science is beginning to tell you
or if people don’t understand -
if they just hold their nose for two minutes
they understand that they are not an independent existence,
it is in transaction.
Not just in terms of breath,
even on the level of subatomic particles,
it's in constant transaction.
If this transaction becomes even minutely conscious,
suddenly you have immense capabilities that you never thought were possible
biological identity is the most limiting identity that you have
because it limits to the area of your body.
Now when you strive, you break this.
It doesn’t matter in what way you strive.
Most people strive in unconscious,
unscientific,
simply out of striving they do things,
but there are ways to strive scientifically in a proper way.
There are tools to strive
with… specific direction to break the limitations of who we are.
If you break this boundary -
the subatomic particles are transacting,
the intelligence is transacting,
only you’re missing the whole game.
If you don’t miss the game,
if you are in the game of life,
not in the game of thoughts and emotions,
you are in the game of life
suddenly just about anything you want you can do, not this or that.
I am saying anything can… a human being can do,
simply if he breaks his barriers
and these barriers are many levels
but the most fundamental thing is the identity.

Julie Gichuru: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen (Applause).
Are you miked?
You’re already miked?
It’s well-hidden (Sadhguru laughs)
by the beautiful beard
so… Ladies and gentlemen
I actually have my phone,
so I can ask Sadhguru for a selfie after this (Laughter).
So if I forget, remind me and we’ll all be in the selfie
because I’ll turn that way, so (Sadhguru laughs)
Good evening everyone.
Sadhguru: Hello?
Julie Gichuru: It’s such a pleasure and an honor to be here, Sadhguru
Sadhguru: Is it... Is it okay if I do a minute’s chant?
Julie Gichuru: Yes, yes, absolutely.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement).
Sadhguru chants Sanskrit chant Jananam Sukhadam...
Sadhguru: Good evening.
Good evening, everyone.
Julie Gichuru: Good evening.
For those of us, who don’t understand –
and there may be some in the room –
what did you sing (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: It’s...
It’s a chant,
which in some way describing the human condition.
Birth is a (Audio disturbance) pleasure
because you can see… (Talks aside: Can somebody fix the feedback, please?)
You can see this on a child’s face –
just being born,
there’s a pleasure about being alive.
You can see it on children’s faces.
But death is a compassion.
We’re glad that we can all die one day.
Right now, if I mention this word,
there’ll be lot of anxiety in people
but the best thing about life is,
nobody fails,
everybody passes (Laughter/Applause).
Just (Laughs)...
Just imagine,
because you did not do life good enough,
they detained you (Laughter),
that wouldn’t be good.
Julie Gichuru: And so death is a passage?
Sadhguru: It... It… It is a compassion.
It’s the compassion (Audio disturbance) of life,
it allows us to pass.
Julie Gichuru: That’s amazing
Sadhguru: And the next part of it means...
See, we may think of many things about our lives.
Right now, we have come here,
we will go there,
we’ll go to many places,
we’ll do many things.
But as far as our physical self is concerned,
the body is concerned… (Audio disturbance)
As far as our body is concerned,
it is going straight to the grave.
Or in other words,
time is one thing that you can’t hold,
it’s ticking away all the time.
If you live great, it ticks away,
if you live lousy, it ticks away,
if you sleep, it ticks away,
if you sit, it ticks away,
if you walk, it ticks away.
Do whatever, it ticks away.
As I’m speaking, you’re one minute closer to death,
that’s what it means.
And this is the biggest thing.
Only because human beings have forgotten
that they are mortal,
they’re not conscious of their mortal nature,
they can invest their time in so many things,
which doesn’t mean a damn thing to them.
If they were conscious today that,
“I’m mortal and time is ticking away”,
they would do only what really matters.
If all of us do only what truly, truly matters to every one of us,
this would be a fantastic place to live.
Julie Gichuru: That’s so powerful.
It’s so powerful.
And I hear you laughing.
I am kind of stunned by the reality of it (Sadhguru laughs),
especially when we look at society
and the fact that so many people are unconscious
and I’ll come back to that.
But I want to bring us to the conversation,
which is the future of the feminine.
And I do have some questions in relation
Deep questions...
Sadhguru: They’ve ruled the past,
they’re ruling the present,
they’ll rule the future (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: The women, ah (Sadhguru laughs) (Applause)!
Questions answered.
No (Laughs)
Sadhguru: So...
Julie Gichuru: So let me start with a deep one
and I... I always like to look at my background
and my culture and in so many ways,
I think I embody two different cultures.
My father is from...
his family was from Kashmir.
My mother’s family is...
is Kenyan African and I see...
Sadhguru: Hey, hey, you cannot say that he’s from Kashmir.
You must say he’s from India (Laughter/Applause).
Julie Gichuru: Oh no, I didn’t say which side he ended up on (Laughter/Applause).
Sorry. We’re...
We’re not into politics yet (Laughter),
we’re going to come to politics in just a short while.
Sadhguru: Because right now, there’s a law in the country.
Julie Gichuru: Oh, is there?
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Julie Gichuru: Oh, I’m treading on (Sadhguru laughs)...
I’m treading on dangerous ground now (Sadhguru laughs).
My father then is originally from India,
so let’s make it clear (Laughs).
I grew up in a family,
where –
and for all the girls in the house, who went through this,
you will understand –
you say something at the table
and nobody notices you said it.
In five minutes, one of your brothers says it
five... five minutes later and everybody says,
“Oh, what an intelligent thing!”
How many ladies went through that growing up?
Do we see...
I see...
I see a few hands.
And you...
I see hands.
And you’re wondering, you know,
“Am I not here, am I not present?
What’s going on?”
What is the problem with our society
and our culture
and why do we hold women down so much?
Sadhguru: See,
instead of talking about men and women
as if they’re two separate species –
they’re not –
the feminine and masculine,
if we address life in that sense
We must understand that
feminine will have a significant role to play,
feminine will find some respect and regard
only if we structure a society in a very balanced way.
If as we are structuring our societies everywhere in the world today,
that economics is the only important thing in our life.
Today, if you say in Nairobi or in Kenya,
“This is a big man”,
it does not mean he has a big brain (Laughter),
it does not mean he has a huge heart,
it does not mean he has something else big,
it means he has a big pocket (Laughter/Applause).
Or in other words,
our entire consciousness is right now ruled by economics.
Economics means just over-glorification of simply,
you know survival process –
complicating survival process like never before.
To provide something for our well-being,
for our comfort, convenience and survival,
we have to arrange something.
This arrangement is slowly raising to such a pitch,
as if it belongs to heaven in the world.
When economics is the driving force,
the role of the feminine will become less and less and less.
Only when in our lives,
in our societies,
there is equal significance
for art, music, love, aesthetics
and many other subtler aspects of our life,
then feminine will have an equal role.
Now you structure a society so skewed
and you’re wondering why feminine doesn’t have a role –
well, it cannot have.
Women can succeed today in this world
only if they’re like men.
There is no other way to succeed
because they have to become masculine
because the social significance or the world’s
the significance of human societies
has shifted from all other subtleties
to one crudeness of economics.
Wherever you go today,
what is the conversation?
Economy.
Can you beat it?
At least they were talking about weather some time ago (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: So it’s a no-win situation (Audio disturbance).
Sadhguru: No, women may...
Women may win
but feminine will lose out,
unless we restructure our societies,
giving equal significance to all the subtler aspects of our life,
where naturally feminine will become prominent
and important in our lives.
Julie Gichuru: That’s powerful.
That means we need to restructure society
and I’ll come later...
Sadhguru: Our priorities have to change.
Julie Gichuru: Yeah,
and we have to start with everyone because...
I’ll come to that because (Sadhguru laughs)
that is yet to come.
Back to family, ladies and gentlemen,
if you look at much of our societies in Africa,
in Asia and all over the world,
there is a struggle when it comes...
And I’ll bring us back to... to...
feminine and masculine as in the gender.
And we do see the prevalence of gender violence,
it’s something that we’re dealing with a lot.
And for instance,
even fighting ills such as female genital mutilation
and trying to re-educate people.
It’s a huge issue within homes,
how do we bring up young men,
who respect and love women,
and how do we bring up young women,
who are confident
and demand love and respect?
How... How do we do that and break the current
Sadhguru: It’s very important that in childhood,
the homes manage this well
because it’s an early age, if they pick up these things,
later on it’s very difficult for them to come to terms with this.
I think that is changing rapidly in this generation.
It has changed rapidly in this generation already, I would say,
in many ways.
Today, it is...
it’s very common at least in India, that
the girls are doing way better than boys
in most of the educational institutions
and a whole lot of parents choose to have girls
rather than boys.
You know, there’s a ulterior motive in this (Laughs)
because if you have a girl,
you just have to take care of till she is maybe eighteen, twenty, twenty-five.
Boy means you don’t know,
he may be on your hands forever (Laughter).
Parents want to be done with the project at some time.
“Project – Children” must be over at some point (Both laugh).
So, things are changing,
I think rapidly,
very seriously changing.
It is just that
the violence within the families is unfortunate.
Once again, it is...
I would say it is not essentially against women.
The violence is not against women.
Right now, we have adopted this mentality,
there’s a whole lot of violence against children,
irrespective of their gender.
So what this shows is,
we are willing to beat up anybody,
who’s little weaker than us.
Not necessarily women, I’m saying.
So, this is always misunderstood as
this is violence against a particular gender.
No, no,
if they find anybody little weaker than them,
they’ll beat them up.
Julie Gichuru: We’re terrible people
Sadhguru: No...
Julie Gichuru: ...and it comes back to the consciousness
and... and that is so...
Sadhguru: So, this is because,
if you bring up a society essentially
on the identification of your physical form or your body –
if I have a stronger body than you,
naturally I think
I can do things with it, all right?
This is why spiritual process is important
because spiritual process does not mean
looking up,
or looking down,
or looking heavenward
or something else.
Spiritual process means
your experience of life has touched a dimension beyond physical nature.
Once your identification shifts to something
beyond your physicality,
then your physical dominance is not a significance...
of any significance to yourself.
When it’s not of any signif... significance to yourself,
you will not try to manifest this in the world
as a physical dominance.
It is wanting to dominate
and now because we’re identified with the body so much,
we will try to dominate physically,
which is experienced as violence by somebody else.
But pushing somebody away and going,
that person doesn’t think it’s violence.
He thinks it’s his right
because he is bigger, of course.
Julie Gichuru: So (Laughs), wow!
Staying within the home,
Sadhguru and the relationship dynamics of the family –
in my family,
I have one daughter and I have sons,
many sons.
Sadhguru: See, you’re also prejudiced (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: Oh, no, no. On which side would you think?
On which side would you think?
Sadhguru: On the male side.
Julie Gichuru: How did you know?
So okay, so in my family...
Sadhguru: You have four boys (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: There we go.
But my daughter is very close to her father.
Do we have that in many families,
where the young lady can get anything from daddy, right?
And... And my sons are very close to mommy.
What happens in society that when they grow up,
you would think then that a man always will treasure a woman.
And you know,
I think when families get it right,
it doesn’t go wrong later.
Where do we get it wrong?
Because clearly in parenting,
there’s something going wrong (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: We must understand this.
See, this is...
That’s why I said this is not against a particular gender.
Well, a man wants a woman, all right?
It’s not that he’s against her.
man-woman relationship is one relationship,
where there is too much overlap.
You have to share everything,
from your bedroom to bathroom
to including your bodies (Julie Gichuru laughs), all right?
Too much overlap.
Julie Gichuru: Even bank accounts (Laughter), yes.
Sadhguru: I wouldn’t get into that now (Laughter).
See, you’re going back to economics (Laughter).
So because there is so much overlap,
there is more room for conflict.
It...
It needs to be...
It is a beautiful overlap only when there is an atmosphere of love.
Once that’s gone,
when it’s a transaction,
this level of overlap is not healthy for a transaction (Laughs).
Transaction is good like this (Gestures).
This much overlap and so many things to transact on a daily basis,
it is bound to cause friction.
Only when there is a certain sense of love and devotion involved in this,
then it...
with that lubrication,
all this friction will go on without much out...
you know, manifestation of friction.
Julie Gichuru: Because the love dominates,
the love takes the space.
Sadhguru: Yes. So today, when we’re thinking of marriages and relationships
with an expiry date in our mind (Laughter)...
Julie Gichuru: Do we (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: A whole lot of people are unfortunately,
the world is coming to that.
There was a time when people were anyway committed.
When that commitment was there,
things came up,
problems happened,
they fought,
again tomorrow they were close
and things went on. Okay,
today morning quarreling, evening fine,
night full of love and morning again quarrel.
Things were going on (Laughs),
I’m saying because there is such a serious overlap of two lives
and there will be… bound to be areas of friction.
If your... Every family comes up with their own devices
of handling this friction
and some people fail to come up with devices
because there is not enough commitment.
If it was very clear to you,
hell or high water,
you got to be with the same person,
then you would find ways to fix it.
Now, you think if it doesn’t work,
she’s finished.
When this is there,
you are unwilling to find ways
because between any two human beings,
if there is so much overlap,
if we are not committed, then being together is difficult,
every small thing flares up into a big thing.
Smallest things will blow up into a place,
where… Today of course,
it leads to divorce or whatever.
This is because
there is no long-term commitment
because we think there’s always another option.
Is it good,
is it bad?
It’s not for me to say that
but I’m just exploring the problem (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: It’s a big problem
and I am focusing on family because really,
I believe it is the...
it plays a pivotal role in society.
And looking at the society we’re living in
and the children that we’re bringing up,
it’s so dynamic.
If they’re looking for positive information out there,
they will find what they are looking for.
If they’re looking for negative information,
they’ll find it,
it’s easily accessible.
This highly digital world we’re living in,
what are the key things that you would say
we need to teach this young generation
to keep them firmly grounded?
Sadhguru: Hello to all the people in the upper regions (Laughter).
See,
when a child enters your life,
it’s like a bundle of joy,
which has entered your life –
with lot of pain, of course.
There’s lot of pain involved in bringing forth (Laughs)
Julie Gichuru: Yes, I can attest to that,
the women can attest to that (Laughs).
Sadhguru: But when the child came,
things that you would have never done in your life,
you start doing.
You can’t sing ever
for nuts even in your bathroom,
suddenly you start singing (Few laugh).
You can’t even bend down and pick up something,
you can’t touch your toes
but you crawl under the sofa along with your child.
You know,
you go under the furniture with him or her.
Like this,
many things.
You sing,
you dance,
you play,
you… For moments at least,
if not for good, for moment at least,
you forgot the concrete block that you have become
and you became life once again, all right?
But somehow,
all the adults believe
they have to teach something as soon as the child comes.
So this is...
People ask me,
“Sadhguru, what is your sadhana?
You did not read scriptures,
you did not go to a teacher,
you did not learn anything
but you seem to know everything,
how is it?”
I tell them,
“This’s the only thing that I (Laughs) did in my life is,
I made sure that I’m not influenced by anybody around me,
whether it’s my parents,
or the culture around me,
or the teachers
or every adult around,
because every adult around you
is trying to teach you something that’s not worked in their life
When I say something that’s not worked in their life –
between you and your child, if you look at it,
who is more joyful?
Your child.
I’m asking,
who should be a consultant for life (Laughter)?
One who knows how to be joyful for no reason,
he should be a consultant?
Or one,
even if everything is working your way,
you carry a grave face and walk around the world,
you should be a consultant for life?
You must decide.
So if a child comes into your life,
it’s not time to teach,
it’s time to learn.
Once again you could reinvent your life,
you could learn what it means to be alive (Applause).
Instead of learning what it means to be alive,
people are carrying grave faces and going around.
Grave is... Grave will anyway come,
you don’t have to practice it on your face (Laughter).
I was (Laughs)... I was speaking at the… You know,
just about four weeks ago,
I was speaking at the Stanford Medical University.
I just looked around, these many doctors who’re sitting there,
all (Gestures) (Laughter)
Many of them, like this (Gestures).
I said,
“See, when you walk into a patient’s room,
grave is one thing that you should not remind them of” (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: They’re going
might be getting there so (Laughs)
Sadhguru: Especially when somebody is not well in a hospital,
you don’t remind them of a grave.
It’s very important that a doctor walks in
with a different sense of vitality and life about him.
So similarly,
a child has come into your life means
it’s time to live it up,
once again to become fully alive.
Whatever you age,
your aliveness need not come down, isn’t it?
Our physical agility may come down with age
but why should your aliveness come down?
If aliveness is coming down,
it means you’re committing suicide in installments (Laughter).
That’s what it means (Laughs).
Yes or no?
Hello (Laughter)?
I’m talking to you,
hello (Laughter/Applause)?
Julie Gichuru: Wow, that’s powerful.
Sadhguru: So children have come –
time to understand
how to make something out of nothing.
That’s what a child is.
You leave him anywhere,
he finds an ant,
he find it interesting enough
to make a universe out of an ant.
We’ve given you a bloody universe
and you’re making nothing out of it (Laughter).
Everything you have today
Compared to any other generation on this planet,
you know more comforts and conveniences than any other generation ever before.
Isn’t it so?
But (Gestures) (Laughter)
Why (Laughs)?
Why means because,
“Traffic, Sadhguru, traffic” (Laughter).
Well, you’re sitting in your dream car, aren’t you (Laughter)?
Julie Gichuru: Enjoy it.
Sadhguru: Traffic is helping you to stay in your dream for some more time (Laughter/Applause).
Julie Gichuru: You know,
what you’ve just told us is,
stop trying to teach your children
and start learning from them, start living.
We’re such a complaining generation of people.
Sadhguru: Oh,
we’re the most whining generation on the planet ever (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: You come to Kenya at a time
when we have anti-something demonstrations,
then we have anti-demonstration demonstrations,
then we have anti-demonstration-demonstration demonstrations
and... And you know, the ordinary Kenyan’s caught in the middle of it
wondering what’s going on.
So I must talk about political leadership for a moment,
if you will allow me.
Can we?
Participants: Yes.
Julie Gichuru: For a moment?
Participants: Yes.
Julie Gichuru: Sadhguru, what’s wrong with our politicians?
So many (Laughter/Applause)
I’m just...
The most basic question...
In so many of our countries
And I think in many ways,
India is similar to Kenya,
very vibrant countries,
you know, alive and...
and brimming with opportunity.
We know what we must do
and we just never seem to be doing
what we know that we must do.
Why?
Why?
What’s wrong?
Sadhguru: See,
I am not saying
Many nations around the world,
I’m not saying the best of men have reached leadership.
No,
it’s not true.
We have chosen a democratic system largely in the world.
What this means is,
in...
in Tamil language,
democracy is translated as jananayakam.
This means people are the leaders.
That’s what it means.
This means one among you,
if you’re willing to go through the works,
you could become a leader.
That’s what it means.
“Oh, come on Sadhguru,
where do I have a chance?”
Well, that’s what it means,
that one among you,
if you understand the system and you’re willing to go through the works
that it takes to get there,
you could get there.
Well, right now,
India has set a huge example like this.
A boy, who was selling tea in a railway station,
is our Prime Minister today,
hmm (Applause)?
I’m...
I’m not bowing down to the man,
I’m not made like that.
But I’m bowing down to this possibility –
a boy, who was selling tea in the railway station,
he could even aspire to become a Prime Minister of such a large nation,
which is a tremendous thing,
never before possible in the history of this humanity.
Isn’t it so?
Never before such things were possible.
That's what democracy means
But are we actively making use of it?
That’s another thing.
Most people
I don’t know how you are in Kenya,
I… I don’t have the numbers
but I’m sure more than sixty percent of you
or more than forty percent of you don’t even go out and vote.
Yes (Few applaud)?
So, that is just one day in five years,
even that you can’t do.
But democracy does not mean just casting your vote.
Democracy means there are many instruments in the system
that every day you are supposed to exercise.
You are supposed to rule.
You have appointed somebody to do the job
but you are supposed to rule.
But you think it’s his job to do.
Well, he is doing it the way he knows it.
You must be okay with it,
you shouldn’t complain.
When you’re unwilling to take responsibility
for your own well-being
and the well-being of your society and your nation,
you shouldn’t complain, isn’t it?
Because you’re only sitting down for dole-outs,
this is what you get.
A beggar shouldn’t complain, isn’t it (Laughs)?
You...
You are not behaving like a leader,
you are not behaving like a jananayaka,
a leader,
a people being leader.
People are not behaving like leaders, are they?
They’re behaving like beggars.
When you behave like beggars, you should not complain.
You can crib in your corner
but you cannot complain (Laughs)
because you have no right to complain
because you are not exercising the instruments of democracy as you should.
About... Like in India, we have a saying,
“You only get the kind of leadership that you deserve.”
For …In many ways,
we’ve been indolent,
we’ve been sitting back and… You know,
in India this is a thing,
I’m sure in Kenya also.
If you go to a tea shop anywhere
India is full of tea shops,
okay (Laughs)
if you go to a tea shop,
the guy who’s selling tea,
making probably fifty-hundred cups of tea in a day,
that’s his job,
he will tell you
how Prime Minister should function (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: And he knows
and he has… Yes, he’s… Yes
Sadhguru: He... He knows.
No, no, he knows.
And he not only knows that
If you know some cricket
I know you do (Julie Gichuru laughs)
he will tell how the Tendulkar,
who
how he doesn’t know the batting technique,
how he should bat (Laughter), all right?
He will...
He will
has advice for everybody.
Only problem is,
he doesn’t know how to make good tea (Laughter/Applause).
This is a serious problem (Laughter).
Everybody knows how somebody else should do their job
but they don’t know how to do theirs (Laughter).
So, in a democracy,
though all of us are responsible for the nation,
the first and foremost thing for us to do is,
whatever we are supposed to do,
we are supposed to do it really well,
not just for my well-being
but constantly being conscious
that this is for the well-being of my nation and my world.
If this is not there, there is no democracy.
There is only feudalism.
You are a feudalist, essentially.
I’m saying most people are feudalists,
only thing is they don’t have a following (Laughter).
And the moment
Even when it comes to voting –
this has happened in every nation –
most people are voting in a committed way.
Because of their religion,
or community,
or caste,
or creed
or party lines,
they’re committed votes.
If you go to United States of America,
Republican,
Democratic
looks like two different religions
and it's committed.
They have two different gods.
A committed vote means democracy is ruined.
Democracy can only happen
if there is a considered vote.
Every time, it is a considered vote.
If you vote for somebody,
who your family votes for,
you should not even know.
That’s what a secret ballot means.
Now, if all of you decide together
and go and vote to one person,
that means there is no democracy
feudalism in the guise of democracy (Applause).
Julie Gichuru: I think you are starting to un-tap
what’s going on here (Both laugh),
it’s really fascinating.
I want to take it a little bit deeper in.
And you know what’s interesting, Sadhguru,
is that in Kenya,
a lot of people do vote. Right?
Participants: Yeah.
Julie Gichuru: We have very high...
Sadhguru: Lot means what?
Julie Gichuru: Interestingly enough, we have high voter turnout.
Sadhguru: How much? Sixty-seventy percent,
what’s your voting?
Julie Gichuru: Above, actually. Yes,
it’s seventy-five percent,
yes
Sadhguru: Good.
Julie Gichuru: …which is possibly in the world is one of the most involved...
Sadhguru: Once seventy-five percent of the people start voting,
this means you will get the leader that you want.
This is what changed in India.
Our voting percetages...
percentages were just hovering around fifty.
The moment it lead...
led to over seventy percent voting,
I think we’re getting leaders that we want, slowly.
We’re getting that (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: So the problem we still have –
and I want your comment on this, please Sadhguru –
is the fact that for us,
the vote almost has become so important that
the next person’s rights become irrelevant,
and what I want and how I want it.
Hakiyatu, isn’t it?
But not hakiyako.
Hakiyatu is my rights
but we don’t say your rights too.
We almost feel like we… you know, we are...
we can trample on your rights to get ours.
What do we do in a society like this,
how do we re...
rebalance?
Sadhguru: See, I know
when people spoke about civil rights,
they spoke about it in an extreme condition of
apartheid
or in an extreme condition of injustice that was happening,
that’s a different thing.
But in any society,
the moment you talk about your rights,
the moment you talk about your freedom,
I think you’re heading for ruin anyway
because you have freedom
only to the extent you’re responsible.
Instead of talking about,
“What is my responsibility in making this happen?”
if you think, “What is my right?” –
all you’re seeing is how to milk your society or your nation
to your benefit.
It’s not going to work.
Then once we start milking,
there will be somebody else,
who is capable of milking it better than you.
When he milks it better than you,
you say,
“Oh, he is doing wrong things.”
No, no, he’s doing it better than you,
that’s all (Laughter).
So, my essential work in the last twenty years has been with leadership –
various levels of leadership,
business leadership,
bureaucratic leadership
and social leadership
and political leadership.
My work has been largely to move people
from their personal ambitions to a larger vision
because what ambition means is,
you have tweaked up your desire
but you have not tweaked up your competence.
You don’t have to worry about tweaking your desire,
human beings should only focus on tweaking their competence.
But right from their childhood –
I don’t know what you’re telling your children –
right from their childhood,
in every family,
they’re telling them,
“You must become this,
you must become that.”
No.
You must only see how a child is empowered
by competence and knowledge and capability.
When this capability is there,
he will do whatever is needed.
“No, no, I’ve already decided
this is what I will do.
Nobody needs it, it doesn’t matter, this is what I will do.”
So right now (Laughs),
I was just joking with them...
You know, we are...
we are running crematoriums in India
because I saw that they were in such a bad shape,
so we took that up.
It’s an important service when...
because everybody dies one day.
And the way it happens there is so clumsy,
so I thought I’ll take this most unpopular thing.
They said,
“Sadhguru, why have you taken this?
This is not good,
this is very negative.”
So I said,
“See, if you go like this,
I’m going to brand it –
‘Isha crematoriums,
everybody is a customer’” (Laughter/Applause).
Julie Gichuru: Did they then stop bothering you?
Sadhguru: Yeah (Laughs),
See, we have decided what is better than something.
Once you do this...
I must tell you this.
When my girl was growing up,
she travelled with me wherever I went
and even as an infant,
one thing I told everybody is,
“Don’t anybody try to teach her anything.
No A-B-C,
no one-two-three,
no languages,
no what is right, what is wrong.
Don’t teach her anything.
Just leave her alone.”
I made sure she’s exposed to every kind of people.
I stayed in the poorest of homes, you know,
in tribal huts,
I stayed in the best possible homes in the world,
all kinds of things,
which gave her a sense of balance about people.
Even today, anywhere you put her,
she is just comfortable.
With so much ease with any class of society,
she managed.
And I made sure
nobody teaches her anything.
So when she was around thirteen years of age,
she came up to me
and she was emotionally disturbed about something.
So she came up to me and said,
“You’re teaching everybody something,
not telling me anything.”
I... I wanted that moment to come (Laughs).
I didn’t want to be a teacher to her.
So I said,
“See, this is all you have to learn,
this is all –
never look up to anybody.”
She looked at me.
I said, “Even me.
Never look up to anybody.
Never look down on anybody.
This is all.
Once you don’t look up to anything
nor look down on anything,
you will see everything the way it is.”
When you see everything the way it is,
you will navigate through this life effortlessly (Applause).
The moment...
The moment you look up to something,
you will exaggerate it.
When you look down on something,
you’ll exaggerate the negative about it.
If you don’t look up or look down,
you will see everything just the way it is
and that’s all that’s needed.
For every solution...
For every problem that is there,
to find solutions,
all that is necessary is
we are able to see it just the way it is.
But right now,
we are thinking our problem is of our politicians.
No, no,
that politician was just one of us yesterday.
Today, he’s taken the trouble of getting there.
You sat in the comfort of your home
and commenting endlessly (Few laugh).
You are a running commentary about everything (Both laugh).
Julie Gichuru: Right
but making bad tea, yeah (Laughter).
True,
true.
So I’m bringing us back for a moment to family, Sadhguru.
And one of the things happening in Kenya,
with much of our young society,
is that we have a lot of single families.
Do...
How many single parent families?
How many people are aware of this happening in society today?
Lot of women are left with the burden of
bringing up children and struggling through
and it’s really very sad.
And I remember,
I’m looking back at
when I first got married and you know,
you get very few lessons on marriage.
You kind of get in and you have to kind of figure it out, right (Sadhguru laughs)?
And in many ways,
it took some time to understand that exactly
what you told us,
when you know unconditional love comes from your partner,
everything is solvable.
And so you put that first and you build up and you build up.
And lot of young families seem to be going in
without the tools to get through those really difficult,
tough times.
Sometimes they don’t even get to the point of...
of marriage and family.
What advice would you give young people courting,
or young people in a situation
where they feel alone and abandoned
and they’re wondering,
“What’s gone wrong,
how do I get it right the next time maybe?”
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs)!
Julie Gichuru: Love is important, right?
Sadhguru: Yes.
A lot of young people are watching this,
so I’m just thinking because (Laughs)
they are having, you know,
eleven love affairs right now on the Facebook,
okay.
Julie Gichuru: On Facebook (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: Yeah. They’re trying parallel eleven different love affairs,
hoping one of them will fall into place.
We need to understand that
certain... certain things don’t get better with practice (Laughter/Applause).
It is...
It is
When men and women came together in marriage –
I’m talking about another time,
not to the current population,
I am talking about another time,
all the oldies who’re here (Laughter) –
when men and women came together in marriage,
they knew nothing about anything about each other.
Even looking at a woman directly was a taboo.
And now for the first time,
they looked at this woman,
everything was new and fresh,
there was so much excitement,
there was so much coming together,
there was so much exploration and discovery.
Though for millions of years,
people have done the same damn thing (Laughter),
still for that individual,
everything was fresh and new
and it was shared just between the two of them
and all this stuff.
This made it last.
Now, before you come to marriage,
you’ve seen too much of life.
And you...
In your mind, you’re comparing one and the other.
Now, long-term commitment becomes difficult.
People come together either out of helplessness or greed
most of the time
because there are...
it’s a mutual benefit scheme (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Wow!
Back to...
Back to the economics of it.
Sadhguru: Yes (Laughs). No,
not just economics,
there are needs in a human being.
There is a physical need,
there is a psychological need,
there’s an emotional need,
social needs,
economic needs,
all kinds of needs.
To fulfill these needs, you make a deal.
If you live with a deal,
it’s invariably going to be ugly.
Deals are made and pick up what you want and go home,
then it’s okay.
What do you say, Manubhai (Laughter)?
You make a deal,
you make your money and go home to a place which means something to you.
When you’re making deals at home,
then it becomes ugly because there’s no place to go.
Or you’ll find a place to go (Laughter/Applause).
Julie Gichuru: Ladies and gentlemen,
I’m going to come to you in just a moment
because we do want to take your questions with Sadhguru as well.
I must ask you,
this is your first trip to Africa?
Sadhguru: No, no, I’ve been...
Julie Gichuru: Oh, it’s...
Oh, you’ve been before?
Sadhguru: Yes, I’ve been in Kenya for three weeks at one time.
Julie Gichuru: Oh, what do you think of the country?
Sadhguru: Oh, I...
It was fantastic
because I only met your animals (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: That’s terrible,
they say we are the warmest people in the world (Laughs).
Sadhguru: No, no, I’m not... I’m not saying people are terrible...
I said I met only the animals and it was fantastic.
This time, I’ve come to meet the people (Laughs) (Applause).
I’m not on a safari this time (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: Well done, well done.
I’m looking at hands now for questions for Sadhguru.
Can I see any?
I know your hands will be up later.
I see there’s one there.
Great, a lady over there
and if you could run across with the mike.
As we’re getting the mike there,
I see people scrambling...
Sadhguru: This is a very bad level of prejudice.
This young man raised his hand first
but you only pick up the lady (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Oh, no! Where are you?
Where are you?
I didn’t see you,
I’m so sorry (Laughter).
Sadhguru: It’s all right (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: I promise you that you are next.
I promise that you are next (Both laugh).
Participant: ____ (Unclear)
Julie Gichuru: Ah, yes. I see hands.
Thank you, thank you, excellent.
And the mike is...
the mikes are coming down here.
Wonderful!
I want to get as many questions for him,
I know people have come far and wide to ask,
so thank you.
We’ll start then with the gentleman since...
Sadhguru: No, no, you... The lady can ask, it’s fine.
I just...
I’m just pointing out to you (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Okay, we’ve got it,
we’ve got it (Laughs).
Thank you, go ahead, go ahead.
Questioner (Ria Sharma): Namaskaram Sadhguru,
my name is Ria Sharma
and I had the privilege to interview you on behalf of East FM.
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs)!
Questioner (Ria Sharma): Yes,
I’m indeed very honored,
very humbled to be in your presence this evening.
My question is about yoga
and of course, Inter...
ahead of International Day,
we’re very privileged to have you here in Nairobi.
My question is about the benefits of yoga,
which everybody talks about,
and you know, everybody knows that
yoga has great benefits for the inner well-being as well as the external.
However, in Nairobi,
with all due respect to certain people,
who are in the craft,
I notice that housewives overnight turn into yoga gurus
because they watch some DVDs,
they watch a few programs on TV
and then decide to start teaching yoga.
Sadhguru: Oh really (Laughter)?
Questioner (Ria Sharma): Yes.
And that is of course a big concern because
people do understand the benefits of yoga
but they don’t understand
that if you’re going to be training under somebody
who’s not quite qualified in the craft,
what are the disadvantages.
So I’d possibly please request you to highlight
what the disadvantages of practicing with –
I’m sorry, the term may sound harsh –
but a quack yoga teacher would be?
Thank you.
Julie Gichuru: So harsh.
I just thought so harsh (Laughs).
Sadhguru: They’re all ladies, she said (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Oh (Laughter)!
Sadhguru: Let me...
Let me clear this a little bit
because one thing is,
as you said,
yoga is not a craft.
As there is a science and technology
to create external well-being
There is an understanding of external situations, which we call as science,
and a technology or a methodology
through which we can create external well-being.
Right now,
this hall is... you know,
we’re controlling the climate with conditioning.
Outside climates can be controlled like this.
What about the inner climate?
So the technology to create the inner climate,
to create the inner ambience of who we are is yoga.
It’s a science and a technology at the same time.
There’s an exploration and there’s a method.
The dangers of not doing it properly are many –
I don’t want to explore that now,
so close to the International Day of Yoga
and put off people (Laughs).
But we must understand,
when we say yoga,
however innocuous it may look,
whatever the practice that is being taught,
it always has a spiritual dimension attached to it.
I don’t know if...
It’s okay if I tell you my own story?
Julie Gichuru: Please, please, that’s why we’re here.
Sadhguru: How I... How I got into the yoga for the wrong reasons (Laughter)
This happened when I was just twelve years of age.
I was in my ancestral home,
my grandfather’s place.
This’s a place, where all we kids have assembled from many cities
for our vacation time.
So one of the sport for the boys is
to jump into a well, which is about eight feet in diameter
and about hundred-and-fifty feet in depth.
Because we always went there in summers,
the water is down by about sixty feet drop or seventy feet drop, in that range.
So, we want to jump in.
You have to jump in properly,
if you go somehow,
your brains will become a smear on the wall (Laughter).
And there is no steps, or grip or anything –
just holding the rock, you want to come up.
It was hard.
And just the sheer pressure of it would make my fingers
all my fingernails bleed
because all my weight is at the tip of my fingers.
And I was pretty good at this.
One day, we’re doing this
and a man, who is over seventy years of age,
was watching us.
Of course, we ignored him.
He was too old to be alive in our experience (Laughter) of life.
Not now,
I’m saying at that time (Laughter),
when I thought even twenty is too old (Laughs).
So this man, without uttering a word,
went and jumped into the well.
I thought he’s finished (Few laugh).
But he came up faster than me
and I didn’t like it (Laughter).
So I asked him, “How?”
He said, “Come and do yoga.”
I followed him like a puppy.
So I’m saying I got into it for all the wrong reasons
but somehow this became so much a part of me,
I did not even think of doing it
but not a single morning ever passed without yoga happening.
I’m using the word “yoga happening”
because when I look back and see,
I never made up my mind,
“I must do this.”
It simply took me over from inside
and things happened like this.
And a...
twelve years later,
something so phenomenal happened to me
that everything changed.
Why I’m saying this is,
the nature of this existence is such,
even for the wrong easons if you do the right things,
right things will happen to you.
That’s how world is made,
that’s how the creation is made (Applause).
So,
doing it right is very important
because there’re many dimensions attached to it.
I went into yoga only for physical prowess.
After I got into it, I came to know
there were other aspects to it,
which were psychological or mental.
So, physical and mental prowess, this is all my thing.
I never imagined,
nor did I ever know there’s another dimension to it altogether.
But there is always that dimension to it.
So when we transmit yoga,
there is a spiritual element to it.
This is the reason,
for example, now for this International Yoga Day,
when we teach,
the Isha Foundation does not teach yoga in such large scale, ever.
We teach what is called as Upa-Yoga.
The word Upa-Yoga literally means
either sub-yoga
or pre-yoga.
For in... In Indian languages,
today the word upayog is being used as something useful.
But actually, the word originates from this,
that we made yoga in such a way,
we took out that aspect of yoga,
which has physiological and psychological benefits
but no spiritual element to it.
When we’re transmitting sol… such large scale,
it’s best to do it that way.
And now that she mentioned this
and you are interested in children with your footprint (Laughs) –
about four months ago,
it came to my notice that
a little over 9000 children committed suicide in India,
below eighteen years of age.
In the age groups of ten to fourteen,
1700 children committed suicide in the last one year.
When I heard this...
See,
no life does not value its own life.
You try to catch an ant,
it will do everything possible to save its own life.
It does not think,
“Ahh, this is just an ant’s life, let it go.”
There’s no such thing.
Every life intrinsically values itself as the highest thing, isn’t it?
But a child
A child is an exuberant life,
a child is a bundle of joy,
a child is a fresh life.
If a child wants to take his own life or her own life,
then we are doing something fundamentally wrong with our lives, isn’t it?
Something very fundamentally wrong in a society,
if children start committing suicide.
I want all of you to look at it this way.
It’s not like statistics.
9000 whatever is not a number.
Suppose in our lives,
our children in our home committed suicide,
below fourteen years of age,
can you ever overcome that, I’m asking?
If they died of disease,
or accident
or something,
that itself is difficult
but somehow we will come out of that.
But if they commit…if they took their own life,
we clearly, clearly know
we’ve done something fundamentally wrong, isn’t it?
So we should know
we’re doing something fundamentally wrong in a society,
when children start taking their own lives.
So when I heard this,
it was deeply disturbing –
why are our children killing themselves?
Then I said...
Off the cuff,
I said,
“We must touch at least 10,000 schools
and bring Upa-Yoga to their life.”
On that day, 10,000 looked like a big number.
Then I travelled these nine states
and met all the Chief Ministers
and the Education Ministers
and things like that.
All of them responded with such enthusiasm.
For this Yoga Day,
in the next two months,
we are initiating Upa-Yoga in over 30,000 schools (Applause).
And the significant aspect of this is,
we are not training the children,
we are training the teach...
We... Our own teachers,
we have trained 45,600 teachers.
These teachers are imparting this to the schoolteachers.
In every school, two to three teachers are being trained.
Above all,
we made an elaborate video.
For a twenty-minute practice,
we made an elaborate video
about showing how it should happen.
So, these newly trained teachers
will only correct the practice.
They will not literally teach the practice.
All they have to do is they have to correct.
We train them for a day
to understand what are all the wrong things that people can do and correction.
And these children will go through this just not for one day.
Five days of the week, through the entire year,
probably for their en... entire school time,
this will go on
and we’re trying to also involve parents wherever we can.
Teaching yoga irresponsibly,
if you...
Right now,
this is the most important need, that is...
See, in terms of external technologies,
we’ve hit the ceiling, all right?
Whether you buy your iPhone Z8 or not –
that’s the next model coming up (Laughter) –
you still don’t know how to use your iPhone 4 fully (Laughter).
That’s a fact, believe me.
You’ve still not explored the full range of things
that damn thing can do.
Yes or no?
Too many things.
So whether the next level of phone comes
or computer comes is not the issue.
Upgrading human beings is the most important thing
that needs to happen in the world (Applause).
So in this effort,
this International Yoga Day I see has been a phenomenal step –
mooted by our Prime Minister
but United Nations took this up.
So these things that we have,
if I can elaborate on this a bit...
See, human intellect is sparking like never before.
Never before in the history of humanity,
this many people could think for themselves.
Yes?
Now once this happens,
logical questions arise.
Once logical questions arise,
so many things which were taken for granted,
which kept people in some kind of control within themselves –
if not liberated,
at least controlled (Laughs) within themselves –
is all going to collapse.
Heavenly solutions will collapse, believe me.
No, I am not talking about you guys up there (Laughter).
That’s quite safe (Laughter).
When people start asking questions,
heavens will crumble.
It’s bound to happen.
If you don’t pull it down,
your children will. Believe me.
Things that you believe,
your children refuse to believe.
Yes or no?
Because unless it makes logical sense to them,
they’re not going to take it.
Whatever the authority,
you can say the scripture says this,
you can say god said this,
you can say somebody said this,
they’re not going to take it unless it makes sense to them.
This is a very positive development in the world
because this means truth will be our authority,
authority will never be the truth.
This is the future of the world (Applause).
So, this International Yoga Day is
just at the right time,
And when the Prime Minister mooted this idea,
as it was...
as she was saying, hundred-and-seventy-seven countries
came together,
it was almost like the world was waiting for it.
It was waiting for India to take a step
but we took such a long time because you know,
we are a little large nation (Laughter),
we take time to take steps (Laughs).
But it was almost like the entire world was waiting
for somebody to say this
because everybody knows –
they may not have consciously addressed it
but everybody knows –
tools for self-transformation are needed.
And tools for self-transformation
should not be in the hands of a guru,
or an organization
or some other higher authority somewhere.
No.
Tools for self-transformation will… should be in the hands of every individual.
I’m asking you a simple question,
don’t feel offended.
Did lo…all of you brush your teeth today (Laughter)?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes. This is because
you have your own brush.
The instrument necessary for cleaning your oral hygiene,
to take care of that,
you have it.
Suppose it was in the hands of the Kenyan government (Laughter),
they fixed up in hundred different places in Nairobi
you can go and have your teeth brushed (Laughter),
probably you would do it once a month (Laughter).
Yes or no?
Because you have to stand in a line to have your teeth cleaned up.
Only because it’s in your hands,
as it’s necessary you will take care of it,
isn’t it?
Similarly,
tools for transformation,
which are logically correct,
scientifically ascertainable,
these kind of tools for transformation,
which does not demand any philosophical adherence,
which does not demand belief system,
which does not come from any authority,
but from your own understanding of your system,
this is needed for the world.
The time is very ripe
because human intellect is sparking like never before.
You can’t bring or so-called well-being
by telling them a philosophy.
It’s not going to work.
It’s already not working.
Because it’s not working,
you see a rapid movement of people seeking chemical solutions.
To be peaceful means have a drink in the evening.
It’s become a norm.
I’m asking all of you,
whatever your age,
in the last twenty-five years,
don’t you see
at least a five-hundred percent increase in the
consumption of alcohol and drugs and psychiatric prescriptions?
This means
we are moving towards madness (Laughter).
Yes.
See,
for example
a maximum period or a longest period of economic well-being compared to any other society in the world.
But today, thirty-nine percent of the European population is under psychiatric prescription… medication.
Three-hundred-and-fifty-million people,
year-on-year,
they are consuming prescription medications for psychiatric problems.
So, with economic well-being,
there is no guarantee that you will get human well-being.
If human...
If economic well-being has to translate into human well-being,
you need tools for transformation within every individual
because
the possibility of economic well-being taking us to ruin
is very much glaring in our face.
In pursuit of human well-being,
we’ve ripped the planet apart, isn’t it?
Just today afternoon they were telling me
that only seven percent of Kenya is under forest cover.
Oh my god,
I’m...
Believe me,
everybody in the world believed
Kenya means ninety percent forest and Nairobi (Laughter).
Yes (Laughs).
That is the image everybody has.
But they told me seven percent.
That is...
That is horrific, I’m telling you.
It's not a simple tragedy.
You don’t know what is the kind of disaster
that...
disaster that can evolve out of seven percent green cover in any nation.
In a continent,
which everybody believes is full of jungles,
full of nature,
full of wildlife –
everybody believes this –
if only seven percent under green cover,
that’s tragic.
Even India is better than this.
With the kind of population pressure we have,
even the percentages of green cover in India is
way better than this.
So, when we go like this,
we must understand,
for a long time we looked up in search of well-being.
People became delusional.
And my delusion and your delusion fought battles
and wars and still going on.
Many people can’t give it up yet (Laughs).
Yes?
Now, from heaven,
we shifted our focus to get our well-being from outside.
Once our focus shifted to the outside world,
we started ripping it.
Don’t think there is some other reason.
It is all in pursuit of human well-being, isn’t it?
Everything we have done is in pursuit of human well-being.
But in the last hundred years,
though we have ripped the planet bald –
not because of age,
simply because we plucked it out –
have we achieved well-being, I’m asking you?
They’re telling me
the world food industry is 7.6 trillion dollars.
The pharmaceutical industry is 7.2 trillion dollars
and the
By the end of 2017,
they say pharmaceutical industry will be bigger than the food industry.
That means we’re eating more medicine than food.
We can’t claim we’re well.
Julie Gichuru: It’s so frightening. You know,
I thought the big question I’d be asking as we close was,
how do we stop talking at each other
and start speaking to each other?
But now, I’ve seen there are so many other levels of things
that we need to do.
We’re going to come back to that
but first I’ll go to the young man now.
I think you’ve got the mike, do you?
It’ll come to you in a moment,
it’s a just behind you.
Please go ahead.
Are we a bit frightened after that insight?
Participants: Yes.
Questioner (Jimmy): Hello. Hi. Good evening, sir.
My name is Jimmy and I have two questions. Basically,
I don’t know much about...
Sadhguru: Hey, I’m a simple guy, ask one at a time (Laughter).
Questioner (Jimmy): So I’ll shoot away with the first one.
You know so much about the universe,
I’ve seen a lot of your videos on YouTube
and you’ve talked about geometry and I saw that video.
The largest telescope upon earth is not able to get a picture of the nearby galaxy,
it’s so far.
So I wanted to ask you
why did god make things,
which are not even visible to human beings,
or we’re not able to travel there?
Julie Gichuru: That’s a tough one.
Sadhguru: Okay.
That... That is a clear message to you
that the universe was not made for you (Laughter/Applause).
Not just other galaxies,
maximum amount of life on this planet itself
you are incapable of even seeing it.
Yes.
Because maximum amount of life on this planet is microscopic actually.
Yes?
Do you know,
just on your facial skin,
there are eighteen-billion bacteria right now crawling around (Laughter)?
Really.
Aren’t you glad you don’t see it (Laughter)?
So this idea...
this idea that
existence is human centric
has caused the maximum amount to damage.
We believing
that this creation were made for me to enjoy this,
to exploit this...
Our science, as we know it,
is just this –
how to use everything in the universe for our well-being.
Well,
we have learnt how to use even an invisible atom.
Do you know,
nobody has seen an atom,
even in an electron microscope?
Nobody has seen it
but we know how to use it.
We know (Laughs) how to make a bomb out of it (Laughter).
So, we have learnt to use everything including human beings
but we have not come to well-being, isn’t it?
All this aspiration,
only in pursuit of well-being
but well-being has not happened.
Because you must understand,
human experience is generated from within you.
Whether it’s joy or misery,
it happens from within you.
Agony or ecstasy happens from within you.
Everything that you ever know happens from within you.
Everything that you ever experienced happens from within you.
At least what is happening from within you (Laughs)
must happen the way you want it, isn’t it (Laughs)?
Right now, we’re talking too much about
the world not happening your way.
I am glad the world is not happening your way (Laughs)
because if the world happens your way,
where do I go, hmm (Laughter)?
The world is like this,
it happens little bit my way,
little bit your way,
little bit somebody else’s way,
it’s all right.
But right now, the biggest problem is,
this one (Referring to oneself) is not happening your way.
That is the big problem, isn’t it?
If this one (Referring to oneself),
yourself,
if you happened hundred percent the way you want yourself to be,
would you keep yourself bliss... blissful or miserable?
The upper regions must tell me (Laughter) –
blissful or miserable?
You must...
Everybody must say something,
I’m going to bless you right now (Laughter).
Blissful.
This...
Your choice for yourself is very clear,
that you want highest level of pleasantness.
What you want for your neighbor may be debatable (Laughter)
but what you want for yourself is very clear to you.
But why is it not happening?
Simply because
it’s not in the direction which you’re looking,
that’s all.
Instead of turning inward,
you’re trying to fix your happiness by fixing the world.
Fix it as much as you want,
this (Referring to oneself) will not get fixed.
If this (Referring to oneself) wants to... has to be fixed, this has to turn inward.
This is what yoga means.
Tools for transformation means transforming yourself,
not fixing somebody else.
A revolution … You know, like at one time,
we said (Laughs)
For Isha, this is what it used to be –
“Welcome to the silent revolution of self-realization.”
People’s idea of a revolution is –
“I want you to change.”
“I want you to change”
is the source of all the problem on the planet, isn’t it?
“I am willing to change” –
this is a revolution.
If you say,
“I am willing to change…”
In your home,
in your workplace,
in your society,
in your country,
you say, “I am willing to change for what needs to happen”,
now this is a revolution
and it’s a silent revolution.
You don’t have to slaughter anybody,
you don’t have to set fire to something,
you don’t have to burn down things,
you don’t have to pull down people.
Change will happen
as everything happens in nature and in existence.
All the most fantastic changes that happened in creation,
are happening quietly, isn’t it?
Yes?
Though they talked about a big bang,
you never had the bang (Laughter).
It happened quietly, everything.
Flowers blossomed quietly.
You are born – such a big happening –
even that happened quietly.
Though your mother might have screamed a bit (Laughter)
but it happened quietly.
But everything significant
Planet is spinning quietly,
sun is coming up quietly, isn’t it?
Everything that’s of greatest significance in the universe
is happening quietly.
Self-transformation also happens that way.
Only thing is it needs to be focused in the right direction.
Right now, we want to fix everybody and everything around us.
We don’t want to transform this (Referring to oneself)
but the world...
People are talking about world peace,
world transformation.
There is no world.
There is only you and me, isn’t it?
If you and me change,
the world has changed.
Julie Gichuru: You know, that’s such a powerful message –
stop pointing at everybody else
and point within,
start within,
transform within.
Sadhguru: Now immediately, the Indians think,
“Sadhguru, where should I go?”
You also come from that part,
your...
at least your father does (Laughter). You...
“Should I go to Himalayas,
should I go and stay in a cave?”
For your information, all caves are taken long time ago (Laughter/Applause).
There is no cave accommodation left,
so you don’t have to go to any cave (Laughs).
You have to turn inward
because whether you go to Himalayas or drown in the ocean,
you’re still the same person, isn’t it?
Julie Gichuru: Do it where you are,
start where you are.
Sadhguru: Ohh. You can start it wherever you are (Laughs),
not where you are because again they will think,
“Sadhguru, I was not in Nairobi,
so I didn’t do my yoga” (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Start wherever you are (Sadhguru laughs)
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Julie Gichuru: …it just doesn’t matter.
I’m going to apologize to you
because I see there were hands up
and I’m sure there are hands on this side,
so I’m going to ask for the mike to come this way,
I’m going to ask for another mike to head upstairs.
Yes,
there’s one there
. The lady in pink, please?
And here.
Yes,
I see a hand at the back and one at the front.
Thank you.
Sadhguru: I find you highly prejudiced.
Julie Gichuru: Oh no! Who did I miss this time?
Sadhguru: You... You choose… You choose… You choose a lady and also pink (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: It’s because you look so vibrant from here.
Honestly, so beautiful. Go ahead.
Questioner: Thank you very much.
With lot of respect, I’d like to ask...
I loved your topic,
the future of the feminine.
And very beginning,
you changed it,
it wasn’t anything to do with the woman,
it was to do with the feminine.
And you acknowledged the hardships women take
in showing their masculine side.
I would love to hear a little bit more about
what you meant, future of the feminine,
because when men behave slightly feminine,
we discriminate them,
we call them gayish.
There’s lots of things
I think that we need to learn from you about
what is masculine,
what is feminine,
nothing to do with the gender.
Julie Gichuru: Let’s come back to that
and I have heard you speak about that before in different engagements.
And it is true that
when a man embraces the feminine inside him,
he’s attacked for it (Sadhguru laughs).
Yeah,
so it’s a difficult situation, you know?
So let’s talk a little more about that,
let’s explore that.
Sadhguru: No, when a man expresses the feminine in him,
people admire him,
hugely.
If he acts like a female,
then they make fun of him (Few laugh).
Let’s understand this clearly
because we... we are tending to mistake
feminine and female.
We are here today,
you and me and everybody else is here today,
we exist
because a man and woman came together.
Maybe some... I’m
If you had a natural birth, I’m saying (Laughter).
Suppose a stork dropped you,
I don’t know about you (Laughter).
I am a natural...
My mother had a natural birth, so
We are here because a man and woman came together.
Now that you’re sitting here as a woman,
does it mean to say
that your father does not exist within you?
He’s an Indian guy,
you can’t obliterate him so easily (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: No,
I definitely...
Sadhguru: Very much there within you, isn’t it?
Now that I am sitting here as a man,
does it mean to say my mother doesn’t exist within me?
Definitely she does, isn’t it?
So, just thinking
getting identified with a few reproductive organs
and making a big affair of
being a man or a woman has to stop.
This is coming from a certain crudeness of existence
because
people’s minds have been corrupted by...
by philosophies and ideologies,
which told you what is pure,
what is impure,
what is okay,
what is not okay,
what is good,
what is not good.
So they’re only thinking about certain body parts.
Why is it even important to recognize somebody
as a man or a woman?
Why is it necessary?
Why can’t you just look at a human being as a human being?
Why body parts are so important?
If body parts are so important,
at least choose the brain,
hmm (Laughter/Applause)?
Why are you so...
such a fetish as what is there in somebody’s pants?
What’s your problem (Laughter)?
Julie Gichuru: What is our problem?
Sadhguru: This is...
These things matter only in two places –
in bedrooms and bathrooms (Laughter).
Nowhere else should it matter,
who’s got what in their clothes.
Okay?
Yes or no?
Julie Gichuru: But what then is the problem?
Sadhguru: This is because of very tremendous religious teachings
that have happened in the world,
which cannot even accept
the simple biology of a human being,
you understand?
They cannot come to terms with the simple biology of who we are.
This’s not a bloody secret.
It is just that we want to conduct ourselves in a certain way,
that’s all.
You think what is under your clothes is a secret?
It’s not a bloody secret.
It is just that
out of our culture and civilization, we learned to handle our body in a certain way,
that’s all.
But somebody said
this is right... this is wrong,
this is evil,
that is okay.
See, the nature of the mind is such...
Shall we do an experiment with all of you?
Next ten seconds, nobody should think of a monkey (Laughter).
Why?
You can’t keep the monkeys out for ten seconds (Laughter)?
No.
Now they told you,
“This is good,
this is bad,
don’t think about bad things.”
Well, that’s a full-time job (Laughter).
Otherwise, tri...
You know, Africa is just out of its tribal life unfortunately.
In tribal societies,
people lived without paying any attention to anybody’s body parts, isn’t it?
When, at a certain moment,
something was on, it was on,
otherwise rest of the time nobody cared about the body parts.
Now, we say we are civilized
but people’s minds are full of body parts (Laughter) –
only certain body parts –
and so we think
man, woman,
man, woman all the time.
Stop this nonsense.
It’s time you looked at human beings as human beings.
Only for certain type of activity,
who is a man,
who is a woman,
becomes relevant. Rest of the time, it has no relevance, isn’t it?
So coming to the feminine,
when we say feminine,
we are not referring to the female in any sense.
There are only few things,
which are compulsorily feminine about a woman.
Rest of the things are wide open for her
to make it whichever way she wants.
Similarly, it’s only a few things,
which are compulsorily masculine about a man.
Rest of the things are wide open for him
to make it whichever way he wants.
Being...
Activating my feminine does not mean
I have to act pansy.
No.
I don’t have to act like a woman
to express my feminine.
In a very masculine way,
I can find expression...
In a very manly way rather,
I can find expression to the feminine within me.
Can’t I mother somebody as a man, I’m asking?
Have you not done it, many of the men?
In a very masculine way,
have you not mothered?
Yes or no? In a very...
In a very female way,
have you not fathered?
So, let’s take this off.
In the existence
You must understand this
When… Most of the yoga that she was talking about,
the... the housewives are taking up from the TV station (Laughs)
and they’re becoming yogis or yoga teachers,
they’re talking about hatha yoga mainly.
Hatha yoga has become as popular as it’s become
because it’s a rebound from the American coast (Laughs).
Julie Gichuru: From America?
Sadhguru: Yes,
it has to go across Atlanta, hit that land and come back,
suddenly everything becomes sacred (Laughter).
I’m saying (Laughs)
I am saying even a kindergarten child today would know
that this human body,
it needs oxygen and it expels carbon dioxide.
Yes?
Even a child would know.
But somebody bottles carbon dioxide and says,
“This is the real thing”
and the entire world drinks it
simply because it comes from the...
across the Atlantic.
So we must understand (Laughs)
what is the level of that influence (Laughs).
So, people are all talking about hatha yoga.
Let me explain what is hatha.
Ha means sun,
tha means moon.
These are the two fundamental dimensions of
masculine and feminine influence upon us.
Sun is the symbolism of masculinity,
moon is the symbolism of femininity.
In this context,
we are all born here and here
only because our mother’s bodies
were in sync with the cycles of the moon.
If our mothers did not sync with the cycles of the moon,
we wouldn’t be born.
Yes or no?
So, the feminine is connected with the moon
and the masculine is connected with the sun.
Or another way of looking at it is,
we are looking at the solar system as a potter’s wheel,
which churns up this body.
If, let us say,
the earth decided to speed up,
okay.
Like your Wi-Fi speed,
internet speed,
you want more speed.
Speed doesn’t mean you’re on an automobile,
or a motorcycle or something anymore,
it means internet speed, okay (Laughter)?
When youth say speed,
they don’t mean motorcycle or something else,
they mean (Both laugh) speed.
So, let’s say the planet decided to speed up.
If it did speed up,
you will see most of the life that we know on this planet will disintegrate.
We are like this only because
this entire solar system is going in a certain way.
We are a consequence of that.
So, this is like a potter’s wheel and we’ve churned up like this.
So in this potter’s wheel,
there are many...
the see… entire system is playing a certain role
in the making of this body.
In this, the moon plays a little more significant role
in the body of the feminine or the female.
Because of that, we say feminine is dominant in her,
compulsively feminine she is on that aspect.
And the role of the sun is bigger in the man’s system.
Because of that, we say he’s a male or masculine.
There is a certain element of compulsively masculine stuff in him.
So one is outgoing,
another is receptive.
Sun is outgoing,
moon is a reflection for us.
Our experience of moon is a reflection.
You wouldn’t have seen it unless it reflected, isn’t it?
Unless it reflected sun’s light.
Now because we have gotten into such a crudeness of mind,
because somewhere we divided the universe
fundamentally because of religious thought in the world,
that something is god,
something is devil,
something is good, something is evil,
something is virtue, something is sin,
something is high, something is low –
because we divided everything like this,
we also divided masculine and feminine,
or male and female.
Now once we divide,
we have to discriminate
which is superior to which.
Now, because whoever is ruling the world,
naturally they say,
“We are superior to you”, all right?
If you rule the world tomorrow, you will say,
“We are superior to you.”
I’m saying both are crude and stupid.
This is two pieces of the same thing.
Now you want to make one above the other,
you will miss the essence of life.
You...
If you make a man superior to a woman,
you’ll miss life,
if you make a woman superior to man,
you’ll miss life.
If you want to know life, you...
As I said earlier,
you do not look up to anything,
look down on anything,
you see everything just the way it is.
Suddenly you will see everything the way it is
and everything is relevant.
If we had seen this,
we wouldn’t have slaughtered the animals,
we wouldn’t have ripped the trees.
We would have understood that all this is very much a part of our life, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
We would have clearly understood
and everybody understood till you got educated (Laughter/Applause).
Every tribe in the world understood,
everybody who lived with nature understood
that tree is as significant as me,
without it I cannot live –
is not some new environmental knowledge
that you got because you got PhD in environmental sciences.
Every human being knew this.
But now we got educated.
That means we got stuffed with information
and our intelligence took a backseat.
Julie Gichuru: In this environment,
before we leave and go to the next question,
I will then pose the question,
the theme of tonight,
which was what is the future of feminine?
In this environment,
Sadhguru (Sadhguru laughs),
what is the future (Laughs) of the feminine?
Sadhguru: See, one thing we must understand –
today, women have access to many things
to which they did not have access to,
in the past.
Not because of some great evolution that happened in human consciousness,
it is simply technology
technology, which has leveled the playing field.
Otherwise,
believe me,
don’t believe that suddenly everybody is evolved
and they brought up the women and gave them everything,
no.
Because of technology,
brawn does not rule anymore.
The power of the muscle is not so important anymore
because technology has leveled it.
If you had big muscles at one time,
you were a big man
because your muscles were the most useful aspect of who you are.
Today, if you have big muscles,
we will give you a menial job to do.
We won’t make you the boss.
Yes?
There was a time,
whoever had the biggest muscles,
he was the boss.
Now if you have big muscles,
we make you stand at the door (Laughter),
we don’t even let you in.
You may make a good bouncer (Laughter).
So, because of this,
women have come up,
but not feminine.
Feminine will not come up,
unless in our education systems –
this is important because you’re involved with this –
in our education systems,
we have to make
music,
dance,
art,
creativity
as important
as science,
technology,
mathematics,
whatever else.
If you don’t make this equally important
Generally, that art class is a damn useless class
that you somehow go and do something and come off.
You don’t go to the art class the way you go to a math class.
Yes?
It is just one more damn thing that you’re supposed to be done with.
No.
Till you make art, music,
everything else, which
which involves a certain creativity,
which is concerned about the aesthetic of life,
not just the utility of life
A woman is useless if you think in terms of utility.
It is the aesthetic.
She is the flower of human species.
Now, flower is useless for somebody
who is thinking in
“Let’s grow the vegetables.
Why flowering plants in the garden?”
Yes.
Let’s grow vegetables, fruits, what we can eat, it will nourish us.
What does the damn flowers do?
They won’t do anything.
I’m telling you –
this’s an extreme thing I’m telling you
but do not...
do not take this for granted
because… If... If men could exist without women,
you should not be surprised if large scale slaughter happens.
They still can’t live without them.
That’s the reason why they’re keeping them alive (Laughter).
Yes,
I know this is an extreme thing I’m saying.
But I’m telling you,
as long as our attitude is
in terms of what is useful,
what is not useful,
what is not useful get rid of it,
this is where it’ll go.
Not that entire world will go that way
but people will start behaving in those terms.
It may not actually physically happen
but it will start happening in human mind –
what is not useful to you, get rid of it.
And in this,
the maximum beating will be taken by the women of the world.
So it’s extremely important,
the aesthetic of life is as important as the utilitarian aspect of life.
What is useful
and what is beautiful is equally important.
If this doesn’t come into every child’s mind through our education systems,
feminine will have a hard time to survive (Applause).
Julie Gichuru: You know, there is some good news,
I think this discussion comes at the right time.
Many of us know that the...
they’re trying to review the curriculum in the education system
and there’s been a refocusing now
on going to the aesthetics,
the talent,
the art.
Sadhguru: Yeah, but the problem is right now,
if your children start learning art, music and start enjoying their life,
the Indians will do information technology
and they’ll go ahead (Laughter).
Tch, I’m saying
Julie Gichuru: And leave us behind.
Sadhguru: Yes, see that is the problem.
Right now, the world is on a race.
Nobody knows what we are racing towards.
Anybody, who looks at it,
can see we’re racing towards a disaster.
If we’re thinking ourselves as the last generation,
of course we’ll win.
But if we’re thinking of a world as a continuum
and we are just a pop-up on this planet,
all right?
We are a two second pup-up on this planet
and we’ll pop-out.
If we understand this,
then we know we’re racing towards a disaster.
If we don’t slow down,
there is no other way.
Slowing down will not happen
because human aspirations cannot be controlled.
Only when your aspiration is finding a genuine expression
When I say genuine expression –
see right now,
whoever you are as a human being,
you want to be something more, isn’t it?
If you try to be something more in a very physical way,
we call this sexuality.
What sexuality means is,
what is not you,
you want to make it a part of yourself.
That’s the effort.
Well, it never succeeds.
For a moment, it feels like a success,
after that it goes away.
If you attempt the same thing emotionally,
we call this love.
What you’re calling as love is the same thing.
What is not you,
you’re trying to make it a part of yourself in an emotional sense.
If it finds a mental expression,
it gets labeled as greed,
as ambition,
as conquest
or simply shopping (Laughter).
What is not you,
you’re trying to make it a part of yourself.
If it finds a conscious expression,
we call this yoga.
What is not you became a part of you in your experience
because you consciously did it.
And this can be kept up,
this can be lived through every moment of your life.
It is not a one moment experience,
it is a living experience,
that you experience everything as yourself.
Yoga does not mean twisting yourself,
yoga does not mean hanging upside down,
yoga does not mean convoluting something –
no.
The word yoga means union.
That means you learnt how to erase the boundaries of your individuality.
Because right now, when you sit,
you are this.
This is me,
that is her,
all right?
But a transaction is happening on many levels.
Let’s just take the breath.
What you exhale, the trees are inhaling.
What the trees exhale, you’re inhaling.
One half of your breathing apparatus is hanging out there (Few laugh).
So you are not such a solid state.
If you don’t have too much intelligence to look at all the other dimensions,
at least this you can see.
If you don’t understand, hold your nose for two minutes,
you will clearly understand what I am saying (Few laugh).
You are not an existence by yourself.
This is a living reality.
In this,
you have blown your bubble.
And the creation is so magnanimous,
for a miniscule, microscopic nonsense like you,
it has given you a fantastic sense of individuality.
I’m...
I’m not trying to depreciate you.
I want you to understand,
in the space of this cosmos –
nobody knows where it begins, where it ends –
in this cosmos,
the very planet,
the very solar system is a speck.
In that speck,
this Planet Earth is a super speck.
In that super speck,
this Nairobi is a micro super speck, all right?
In that, you are a big man,
hmm (Laughter/Applause)?
I’m saying...
I’m saying this is a serious loss of perspective.
I...
We have lost this perspectives
mainly because of the so-called religious thought
that we have in this world.
Somebody told you,
you are the center of the universe.
No,
you...
your very solar system,
tomorrow morning if this solar system evaporates,
nobody will notice it,
that’s how small it is.
Yes,
you and me may be very big
but before you and me came,
there were countless number of people on this planet.
Yes?
They were also very smart.
They were also very big people in their times.
Where are they?
All topsoil, hmm (Laughter).
Don’t wait till you become topsoil (Laughter).
Or you think your friends will bury you real deep (Laughter),
fearing that you will raise from the dead.
Julie Gichuru: And we shall all be top soil one day, that is
Sadhguru: Yes. So but if you realize this now,
that you are just a small pop-up
One of the most fundamental things
that we have is,
as a generation,
we have a baton to carry.
How the world was given to us,
how our parents made us,
we should make the world little better for the next generation (Applause).
And
not only that
we must make the next generation little better than us,
otherwise we’ve failed as a generation (Applause).
Julie Gichuru: Sadhguru, you know,
I am so touched that you said that,
because I started a hash tag some months ago,
“Better than us”
because it just hit me...
Sadhguru: No, they...
The problem is they already think so (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: They do.
By the way,
I think they already are.
I think they already are.
But can you imagine,
if they can just be better than us,
if we can just do better with them, that’s a... that’s a good start.
I’m so touched that you said that.
I see hands up there,
so gentleman in green up there,
I see that. There was a hand right there at the back somewhere?
It’s gone?
Okay, so there’s a lady at the front now.
Sadhguru: Hey, it’s okay, you can pick on the ladies.
I won’t… I won’t comment again (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Gentleman at the back first
and then you go ahead, please. Thank you.
Sadhguru: The microphone is not on.
Julie Gichuru: I think can we give you a minute
just to sort out your mike...
Sadhguru: Okay, let her finish the question.
Turn it on, please.
Questioner (Santosh): Sadhguru, please accept my humble pranam.
My name is Santosh,
I am born in India but working in Africa for last fifteen years.
In the beginning of the discussion,
you started that we are so busy in doing things
that does not matter –
actually they should not matter –
and we forget to enjoy life.
Now when I look at myself,
it has been almost fifteen years or little more
in profession.
And we as professionals probably
Say for example,
like I’m into FMCG sector
and I am creating a brand.
To create how my product should look at it,
I actually enjoy it.
I enjoy the creativity in the product,
in its distribution system,
innovation that we bring into the business
and sometimes it takes more than ten hours or twelve hours of a day.
Now for somebody, including some of members of my family,
probably that is something that is...
that should not matter or
probably I’m in a mad rush.
But no, I’m enjoying it.
Now my dilemma is,
where to draw a line.
For example,
I...
I will extend this little further.
Sadhguru: No, no. You asked the question,
you shouldn’t answer the question,
it won’t be
Julie Gichuru: Thank you.
Thank you so much for the question.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Don’t think drawing the line is your prerogative all the time.
If you get too much involved with your fancy product,
your wife will draw the line (Laughter/Applause).
We’re talking about the future of the feminine (Laughs).
Your family will draw the line.
Sometimes it’s a line that you cannot cross after some time (Laughs).
Yes?
And they may be on the other side of the line (Laughs).
yes
Julie Gichuru: I read something that you said...
Sadhguru: Yes.
You may live in the same home
but they may be on the other side of the line
and you can never cross the line.
Yes or no?
Does it happen or not?
Yes.
So,
if you love creating products,
you can do it.
Nobody is saying no.
It’s just that
everything that we take up needs a certain level of involvement.
Without involvement,
many things won’t work.
And first of all,
you must understand,
you got married and created a family
to fulfill your needs,
not to fulfill their needs.
Your children did not come knocking on your semen (Laughter).
Yes?
They did not come and knock,
“Please make me happen” (Laughter).
It's your needs, which made these things happen.
We must understand this
because lot of people are becoming overly this thing that,
“I did this,
I did this”, you know?
No,
nobody asked you that you should do all this.
You did this to fulfill your own needs, isn’t it?
Now that your needs are maybe little bit fulfilled,
now suddenly you become magnanimous
and you think others...
You know,
“I don’t have such needs anymore,
I just create a nice cosmetic product and I’m doing great.”
Yes, it is so.
At different stages in your life, you have different needs.
But once you step into certain things,
certain needs will hold you
because certain needs that you touch demand commitment.
Tch, is it okay if I tell you a joke (Few laugh)?
It once happened,
a man has a gala
gala fight with his wife.
That’s not a rare happening, you know.
So, he didn’t know what to do,
he stormed out of the house.
It’s only after you walk out on the street,
then you don’t know
you don’t know where to go (Laughter).
So he loitered here and there (Laughs) and everywhere
and went little outside the town.
It was evening.
He was just struggling.
He has to find a dignified reason to get back, all right?
He’s left home.
You need a good reason –
either she must come searching,
but if she doesn’t come,
he must find a tch,
a decent reason to get back.
So he was loitering around,
then he saw a sadhu.
A sadhu means a wandering mendicant.
So he was just settling down for the night under a tree.
He went and like you,
did pranams,
fell at his feet and said,
“Sadhu Maharaj,
biwi bahut pareshan de raha hai.
Kuch sulabh upay hai to bolo
The sadhu glared at him and said,
“Bewakoof,
sulabh ha... upay hai to mein kyon sadhu ban ke yahan baith raha hoon
He said...
He begged sadhu...
He fell at his feet and said,
“My wife is giving me too much trouble.
If there is an easy solution,
please tell me,
is there a simple easy solution?”
So sadhu glared at him and said,
“You idiot, if there was as simple, easy solution,
why would I be wandering around the world” (Laughter)?
I am saying,
to create anything that you want,
it takes a certain involvement.
You created a family
because you wanted a certain atmosphere around you.
If you were made like this,
you were fine by yourself,
that if you sit here, you’re complete by yourself,
you wouldn’t have bothered to make a family.
You made it because...
not because they need you,
because you can’t live without it.
Let’s be straight about it.
Yes or no (Applause)?
So
now, suddenly halfway down,
you suddenly change your tack. Tch,
then they will know how to deal with it (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Wow, then the line will be drawn,
the line...
Our final question for the night
because really it’s already time to wrap up.
I’m so sorry,
I do see the hands and I really apologize.
Please go ahead.
Questioner (Mary): Good evening, thank you for giving me the last question.
You said something that is very interesting
when you said that
it’s our responsibility to make the generation after us a bit better.
And me...
for me, as a young mother,
it’s quite a concern.
And I would like to ask you Sadhguru,
if you have three tips to give me
as a mum
on how to protect my children from disconnections of themselves
while living in the society,
what would it be?
Julie Gichuru: Would you give us your name, please?
Introduce yourself.
Questioner (Mary): My name is Mary.
Sadhguru: Mary, the three tips are –
involvement
and involvement
and deeper involvement (Applause)
because...
Julie Gichuru: And it never stops.
It never stops.
Sadhguru: No, if they do well, it stops.
Julie Gichuru: Oh, really?
Really?
We have to let go (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: Whether you let go or...
If you let go, it’ll happen in a beautiful way,
if you don’t let go, they will escape (Laughter).
That is, if you brought them up well.
If you brought them up in a helpless manner,
they will stay with you,
wingless birds, all right (Laughs)?
Wingless birds have happened in some very extreme climates.
So, if your birds at home are wingless,
that means you have an extreme climate.
That’s what it means.
Now,
when I say involvement,
involvement,
involvement,
you must understand this.
This idea – you know,
this is something that’s in common usage –
that
“I was brought up this way,
I was brought up that way
or I was raised this way”,
I thought we only raise cattle (Laughter).
Human beings need not be raised.
People say, “I was raised Hindu,
I was raised Christian,
I was raised this.”
Nobody should be raised any way
because when it comes to creation the way it is
For all the other creatures,
nature has drawn two lines.
Within that,
they live and die.
When it comes to a human being,
nature hasdrawn only one line –
base line,
no top line.
So the important thing is
you should never raise them.
Your business is just to create a loving,
supportive atmosphere.
“Oh, suppose they become something,
which is not like me?”
If they become like you, that’s a crime (Laughter).
They should become something
that you could not imagine as a generation, isn’t it?
What should your children become?
They should not become what you desire.
They should become what you could not imagine.
So do you have the courage
to raise something that you cannot imagine (Applause)?
First of all,
you need to understand,
your children are not yours.
You don’t own the life.
It’s a privilege,
they came through you,
you enjoyed all that,
you laughed with them,
you cried with them,
you played with them,
you enjoyed all that.
But they don’t belong to you.
They only come through you.
Just enjoy the privilege that they are with you now
and that’s about it.
You don’t try to raise them,
you just...
Your business as a mother, is to create...
Protect them against a few things,
which can cause damage to them
because you’re not the only influence,
there’s a world influencing them.
And for a modern mother
because I have to tell you this because
internet is a bigger influence than
mother, or father or anybody for that matter (Laughs).
I know this may look like an archaic opinion
but you will regret this in future
if you don’t do this now.
At least till they are twelve to fourteen years of age,
there is no need for these things,
these gadgets.
They must learn to use this gadget (Referring to oneself).
This (Referring to oneself) is (Applause)...
This (Referring to oneself) is the most sophisticated technology on this planet.
This human mechanism,
isn’t this the highest level of technology in the universe that we know?
There may be some alien, who’s better than us,
but we’ve not seen (Few laugh).
But among what we have seen,
this (Referring to oneself) is the highest level of technology, isn’t it?
The only problem with human beings is,
they have not even bothered to read the user’s manual (Laughter).
Now what internet means is,
what your school means is –
the present level of schooling,
what it means is –
cram yourself with all kinds of things.
You pay attention to everything,
you know what is inside a frog,
how a frog’s liver looks.
What are you going to do with this?
I’m saying
every high school child is cutting open a cockroach and a frog.
What for?
I... I’m saying, when you bring up children with this level of cruelty,
a live frog you open it up and enjoy his heart beating,
what are you made of, I’m asking?
You call this science?
I call this inhumanity.
I call this absolutely senseless way of raising your children.
“Oh no, we learnt so much.”
If they’ve learnt so much, that is enough,
show it on a computer, how a heart beats.
Where is the need for everybody to open up a live animal,
nailed to a piece of wood?
A...
Almost all of you have done it, right?
Julie Gichuru: It was traumatic.
I was traumatized.
Sadhguru: No, I am saying, we call this education.
A heartless education.
What is the point of a heartless education?
If you do this kind of education,
you’ll ha... you’ll create a heartless society,
which you’re seeing in so many different ways.
We are training children to become brutes.
See,
if I can nail a frog to this wooden platform,
cut him open when he’s still alive and screaming,
and look at his heart and how it beats,
I enjoy it and I fiddle around with his liver –
I’m saying, at another level,
why can’t I pick one of you and do the same thing?
Tch,
only because there is a law,
I may be stopping, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
That’s what it amounts to. Isn’t it so?
Only because there is a law against it,
I may be stopping.
A law cannot make us human beings.
A law can control a few things in the society.
This will not shape human consciousness.
Because human beings experience themselves in a certain way,
we thought of bringing that in the form of law.
But law will not make a human being.
If you are human,
you will naturally be in a certain way.
This must come forth.
If want to bring up your children,
if they’re still below five, six years of age now,
the best thing to do it
not expose them to all these things.
Expose them to life.
When I say life,
there is nature,
there is insect,
there is animal,
there is worm.
I’m telling you, these creatures are far more important than you.
Tomorrow, if all the insects disappear, you have...
the entire life on this planet will cease to exist
in about four to five years’ time.
Do you know this?
If all the worms disappear,
the entire life on this planet will cease to exist
in approximately eighteen months to twenty-four months.
When somebody calls you a worm,
you must understand,
they’re saying you’re a very important life (Laughter/Applause).
But if all the human beings disappear tomorrow morning,
this world will flourish.
So we must understand,
we are not the only life,
we are here as a product of all this life evolving to this place.
We must at least show some sign of evolution, isn’t it?
We are supposed to be the peak of evolution on this planet.
Should we not show that
we are little better than them?
But we are not showing this simply because
we are screwed up with our scriptures,
our textbooks,
our teachings.
No.
Please expose them to life.
Child will understand life perfectly well.
They are better equipped to perceive life
than you are
because they are not structured in their head.
They perceive life.
Oh, what will happen to them?
How will they earn a living?”
If you allow a child to develop his body and his brain to the fullest...
There are ways to do it,
I can’t go… elaborate on this now.
But there are ways,
where we can ensure the human body and the human brain has grown to its full size,
in every way.
If you have a full grown body and full grown brain,
they will know how to deal with anything for that matter.
Half-grown brain
but you’re highly educated,
what is the point?
You don’t know how to live.
You may know how to extract something from the world
but you don’t know how to live.
Isn’t that the fate of humanity right now, unfortunately?
They know how to extract something from everything.
I want you to know,
they are extracting protein from microscopic bacteria
but still human beings are not healthy (Laughs).
So, we know how to extract
but we don’t know how to live
because we’re paying attention to everything,
we are not paying attention to this (Referring to oneself).
This (Referring to oneself) needs attention –
not in the mirror,
not through somebody else
but inwardly,
beyond this body,
beyond this mind,
to know what is the nature of my existence.
The more you know about this (Referring to oneself),
the better you can handle it. Yes or no?
“How far is it?
What do I have to do for this?
How far it is?
Should I book a Himalayan cave for myself or my child” (Laughs)?
Julie Gichuru: It’s gone already.
Sadhguru: It’s already gone, taken.
It’s taken.
No accommodation.
It’s like this.
Someone came looking for Isha Yoga Center in Southern India.
They came to a local village and asked a boy,
who was sitting there,
“How far is Isha Yoga Center?”
The boy said, “It’s 24,996 miles.”
They said, “What! That far?” He said,
“Yeah, the way you’re going.
If you turn around, it’s four miles” (Laughter).
We have to turn around.
In is the only way out (Applause).
Julie Gichuru: Thank you so much.
We have come to a close.
But I... I do have a final question that I think is so pertinent
in an environment,
where people are talking at each other so much, you know.
And I’ve done interviews for so many years in the media
and there’s always this need to have a confrontation, you know,
to one up, you know,
“I’m going to one up the person I’m sitting with”,
rather than the need to listen to what the next person is saying
before you even respond.
What advice can you give us
as to how we start to better relate and speak to each other,
rather than at each other?
Sadhguru: How to listen and still have TRP (Laughter)?
Julie Gichuru: T…?
Sadhguru: Oh, you don’t know what’s TRP?
Julie Gichuru: No, what’s TRP (Laughs)?
Sadhguru: Oh, okay.
It’s a rating system in India for each television channel (Both laugh).
So everybody has understood
the only way to have TRP is
all of us shouting at the same time (Laughs).
If you listen, there is no TRP.
Anyway,
now that TRP is not relevant in Kenya (Laughs)...
See,
because this was about the...
That lady,
we’re talking about the feminine but she’s on the phone.
Hello (Laughter)?
Julie Gichuru: She’s tweeting what you’re saying (Sadhguru laughs).
Yes (Laughs).
Sadhguru: In the yogic culture,
a woman is referred to as a sati.
Sati means
one who knows how to wait,
because waiting was always considered a higher quality
than doing
because all action has a beginning and an end
but waiting can be eternal.
There is an eternal quality to waiting.
Just by waiting,
people transform themselves.
There are innumerable stories in the yogic culture,
where women became great seers and sages
without any spiritual practice.
No religion,
no nothing,
simply waiting.
And if anything beautiful has to happen in your life,
you have to learn to wait.
Suppose you want to grow a garden in your house.
If you’re in a rush
that you must have flowers tomorrow morning in your garden,
you just have to buy Singapore plastic flowers and stick it (Laughter),
otherwise you have to plant and wait.
You want to deliver a baby,
you have to wait, isn’t it?
There is a waiting quality,
you just have to wait.
With a belly full, it may feel like an eternity
but you wait.
Simply wait,
you don’t mess with it.
You just wait
because everything beautiful in the universe happens like this.
If you create the necessary conditions and you wait,
it will happen.
The same goes for bringing up children.
You create the necessary atmosphere and you wait,
they will grow.
If you think you must fix,
you cannot fix.
You may know how to reproduce
but you do not know how to fix your children,
do you?
Hello (Laughs)?
If you have the love and commitment, you can wait.
Because to wait,
you need an enormous sense of love and commitment to something,
otherwise you cannot wait.
Only when you have a deep sense of love and commitment,
you can wait,
otherwise you cannot wait.
One thing that they’re learning today is
inability to wait.
4G, not fast enough (Few laugh).
There was a time,
from India,
many of these people,
their forefathers travelled for over thirty to forty-five days
to reach the Kenyan coast, okay?
To east... east... to reach East Africa.
But today they’re here in five hours probably, flat.
But it’s too much time.
They can’t wait anymore.
I’m not saying we should not have faster airplanes and faster cars,
I’m always for speed that way (Laughs).
But you must know how to wait.
What you said as listening is just a part of waiting.
This is important,
that we must inculcate this in our children and in everybody’s life –
how much time you spend in expression,
you must spend at least equal amount of time in perception.
Right now,
this is a world of overexpression.
Like you said,
somebody is tweeting what I’m saying.
It doesn’t matter they miss the next thing
but they tweeted the last thing –
that’s important,
expression.
This is a world, where it’s all about expression today,
no perception.
You will become hollower and all hollower as days go by.
You will know that galaxy Z67,
what is the distance between that galaxy and the Planet Earth.
It doesn’t mean a damn thing
whether it’s a million light years, or ten-million light years
or a billion light years.
What does a goddamn light year mean to you, I’m asking?
It’s just a word, isn’t it?
It’s just words and words.
Our education has become just words and words and words.
Because they gathered so many words,
they have to spill it all the time (Laughs).
So one thing everybody can do is,
in your life,
at least one day in a month –
this is very much a part of the Indian culture,
I don’t know whether they’re still keeping it –
one day in a month,
you’re supposed to eat little less and not say anything,
silent,
simply, quietly.
Not reading, not doing,
simply quietly
because you must spend enough time in perception
before you express.
Then your expression will be of a great quality.
If you are all expression and no perception,
then you have a life on Facebook (Laughter).
Julie Gichuru: Thank you so much,
please let’s give a warm round of applause for Sadhguru.
Thank you so much (Sadhguru laughs) (Applause).
Today, we as a nation
are on a threshold.
These seven decades of independence
have been a journey of striving and sacrifice,
corruption and bungling,
great achievements and missed opportunities,
dotted with four wars
and now the threat of terrorism.
Yet, with all this,
we have still managed to reach a point
where we as a nation are
on the verge of a completely new possibility.
The coming decade will be crucial
in solving the long endured
problems of poverty and privation of large masses of people.
For the first time
tor the very first time,
we are in access of an opportunity
to take a huge mass of humanity
from one level of living to another.
If we as a nation
act in unity,
awareness and focus,
this will become a reality.
We as a generation of Indians
will have the fortune of realizing
this never-before possibility.
It is the duty of every citizen
to strengthen the hands of those
who have taken the responsibility of administering this nation.
May the nation move into
an era of new possibilities.

Questioner: Sadhguru Namaskaram.
Kiran Bedi: Identify.
Questioner: Yeah I am Sandeep Kalra
Sadhguru: There is a…there is a police woman, you must identify yourself (Laughter).
Questioner: My question is with something which I had experienced.
We have a small NGO.
We started that to enable people so that they can live well.
So we employed some boys who were the sons of these maids and drivers.
We told them that “You come, we will teach you how to work on CNC machines.”
Those boys, they came for two days
and third day they didn’t turn up.
We asked them “Why you are not coming up”
they say “Humare haath kaale ho jaate hain”
“My hands become black,
I don’t want to work with my hands.”
This is what is happening that after education,
all parents,
even including myself,
I want my child not to do a handwork.
He should be an officer,
he should sit in the office or he should be in the AC.
Now this is something where the erosion has happened.
I would like your insight on this.
Sadhguru: I think I kind of addressed this in the beginning.
Our idea of education is entire English unfortunately.
Everybody is going to the university.
For what?
We have to live in this universe, not in a university, okay? (Applause)
right now,
this is a serious thing happening in the country.
I do not know if these laws are across the nation
but at least in Tamil Nadu –
because there were children dropping out of school,
the government passed a law a few years ago
saying that “You cannot fail a child till he reaches 9th standard.”
So from 1st standard to 9th standard it is free pass.
This was done –
misplaced compassion.
Because if you fail him at 3rd standard,
then he will go back home, he won’t come back
and sit in the same class again.
So let him somehow continue. Good intention.
But today you have millions of youth
who are fourteen-fifteen years of age,
who wear pants,
who have the attitude of the educated but they don’t know education.
They can’t add 2 + 2.
But they have the attitude of the educated.
Now they can’t go back to the farm and work with their father.
They can’t learn carpentry if their father is a carpenter
or a blacksmith or whatever your CNC machine.
Now we are creating this youth.
This is a dangerous thing.
Youth without purpose is a dangerous possibility, always.
So our idea of education has to change.
Why is it that everybody has to go to school?
I do not believe in this compulsory education thing at all.
Why is it that everybody has to go to school?
We have to make a law.
By the time you are eighteen,
everybody must be tested, you must have some skill,
otherwise you must join the army or do something. (Applause)
Some skill, you must be able to do something with your hands or your brains.
If you have no skill,
you must go for two years of some kind of compulsory training.
It could be you know semi armed forces,
it could be police,
it could be some other industrial training,
whatever.
Kept there for two years and trained.
In every country… In many countries who want to come up well,
they have two years of compulsory army training.
Ours need not be necessary military training.
It could be industrial training,
it could be something else. But compulsorily they must go through.
By eighteen if they don’t have a skill,
or they are not progressing towards their academic capabilities,
they must compulsorily go.
If you don’t skill the nation, you will kill the nation. (Applause)
(Questioner): Could you explain the importance of a living master
opposed to a master who is no longer in his body
and the difference really?
(Sadhguru): Do I have to really explain the difference between the dead and the living?
(Laughs)
It's a big difference, isn't it?
What would you like to be right now --
living or dead?
Living, isn't it?
So the values of living I don''t have to sing.
It''s very significant to be living, isn't it?
Hmm?
Whether you are master or no master
it is very significant to be living, isn't it?
So that significance continues in everything.
Those who left their bodies can be a great inspiration,
but you cannot work with them.
There may be a certain span of time
when they may be willing to work,
or they may be capable of working for a certain span of time,
that is,if they have set themselves up like that,
if they have certain level of mastery upon themselves,
there may be some who will work for a certain period of time,
otherwise their energies are conducive for your sadhana,
but they are not a guidance.
They are a good ambience,
they are a good atmosphere,
they' are good soil for you to grow,
but still they are not a guidance.
When you sit here
you are not mostly receptivity;
you are mostly your own mind, isn't it?
Hmm?
Am I right?
Yes?
When you're mostly your own mind,
you need guidance and guidance and guidance and guidance.
If you are all receptivity you don''t even need a master,
I'm telling you, because grace is all over.
You don''t need a master, you don''t need a temple,
you don't need a meditation, you don't need anything
if you're all receptivity.
That's a rare being.
Right now you''re largely mind,
moments of receptivity may be here and there, isn't it?
When you are largely mind
you will do best with the living, not with the dead.
If you're all receptivity,
you do well with the dead
and even without the dead
you would do great
because grace is not in one place in the existence.
There is no place in the existence where there's no grace.
Maybe a few places are more conducive, that's different,
but there is no place in the existence where there is no grace.
It is just that,
is it churning up intensely enough in a particular place
for you to be receptive?
Because your receptivity is at a certain level of insensitivity.
Now you see,
you sit here you think this is just a garden.
If you go into the temple you will become like this.
Hmm?
But some people go into Dhyanalinga Temple
and they look around, nothing is happening,
just chit, chit, chit, water drops are falling;
'Nothing happening. What's happening here?'
Then we dunk them in cold water here.(referring to Theerthakund)
Then they go, sit there and
they'll begin to - something happening.
There are some, even if you dunk them three times in the cold water
nothing happens, they go sit there and still look up and down.
You take them there to Bhairavi, suddenly they are up.
These are different types of energies.
It is not that here it's any less;
even here it is
but it is not in the same level of intensity that you can perceive.
Wherever you are it is there.
You know there used to be boards,
I don't know if they're still there,
I've not come and checked.
First when I came --
when we came and opened the Triangular Block
which was the only thing --
actually we had only one hut
and the first thing we built in the Triangular Block is one room and
we built the toilet block.
Then I found people had toilet problems.
You know what's a toilet problem?
It once happened;
Shankaran Pillai went to the doctor and said,
'Doctor, I have some serious toilet problems.'
Then doctor asked,
'What is the problem?
You are not able to urinate,
you're not able to pee?'
'No doctor perfect, every day 6 o' 'clock in the morning like clockwork it happens.'
'So you are not able... your bowels are not moving; what's happening?'
'No doctor it's perfect, every day at 7 o' 'clock in the morning like clockwork,
always on the dot.'
Then doctor thought about it,
'Then what is the toilet problem you have?'
He said, 'But doctor, I always get up at 8 o' 'clock!'
(Laughter) & (applause)
So people had such toilet problems;
not that it was not happening,
it was happening... it was happening little messy. (laughs)
So I asked them to put up a board that,
'Divine is here also.'
Inside every toilet when you close the door,
when you sit down it says,
'Divine is here also.' (Laughs)
So that you shit with some sanctity.
Shit can be a spiritual process.
After all the whole spiritual process is to cleanse yourself.
It is one of the most
the best clean-up jobs you can do in a day.
Yes?
So Grace is there also, I am saying;
it's not any less in the toilet,
but you may not be able to feel it in the toilet
because you want to finish your job and go out of that place.
Temple is more conducive; not just in atmosphere
even in terms of energy,
it is made conducive so that you can feel it.
Right now there is life energy everywhere,
but you're not able to take it in.
You have to make food in a certain way and consume it then only
you are able to take it in.
A goat comes and grazes this grass and he is nourished.
You cannot eat this grass and be nourished;
you need a different kind of thing.
There are many insect forms,
there are many other microorganisms
where for them 90% of their life energy happens
because of sunlight and air -
no water, no food.
Only 10% of their energy happens because of water and
whatever food they consume because they are micro.
If you are micro,
how much would you consume?
Micro... micro, isn't it?
So even in you if you become very receptive you will notice
you will see on a particular day
if you remain very ecstatic through the day
you will see the volume of food that you eat will just come down
because your receptivity is better.
How you receive the sunlight, air and water --
easily 60% of your life energies can be generated
from sunlight, air and water.
Only 40% from the food that you eat.
Most human beings in the world can eat
25 to 30% of what they're eating right now
and live perfectly well,
maintain the same weight - not lose weight, maintain the same weight,
live perfectly well,
become much more healthy, much more agile,
much more active and much more energetic
with just 25 to 30% of the food that they are eating.
You can experiment and it happens;
when you're in a Bhava Spandana Program
you're not even eating 20-25% of the food that you normally eat,
because we don't give you time to eat (Laughs)
and people are much more energetic than usual.
People come to Samyama, if they become meditative they barely eat and
they're still fine.
So your receptivity has to be enhanced.
If your receptivity is enhanced --
dead, living, even the non-existents will help you,
but when you are so full of mind you must be with the living,
otherwise you will deceive yourself,
you will receive all kinds of messages,
the kind of messages that you like.
If your guru sends you a note from heaven,
'I love you,' don't believe it, it's your mind.
Yes?
It's your mind,
he doesn't do such things.
It's economical to receive love letters from heaven
because it doesn't cost any paper.
You know, it's ecologically very sensitive issue?
Paper.
So it's a very eco-friendly love affair.
It happened.
A boy
went to college.
First day, he looked like this,
on his left side there was a beautiful girl.
So, on a little piece of paper he wrote,
'I love you, do you?'
And passed the note to her.
She wrote, 'No!'And passed it back.
He looked at it, then he wiped out the 'No' and
gave it to the girl who was behind. (Laughter)
She looked at it and she said, 'Yes!' And sent it back.
The moral of the story is
(Laughter)
save paper and save nature. (Applause)
So, ecologically it's good, spiritually not good.
So when you are so much mind
you need constant
you need another mind to fix you.
If you are not mind, you were all receptivity,
then the dead and even the non-existent would help;
even a rock would help you, I'm telling you.
Anything --
just a blade of grass could be your guru.
Yes.
But that is if you are mindless.
When you're so full of mind,
no -
you need another mind,
cleverer than your mind, constantly fixing you.(Laughs)

(Sadhguru): Is the tree under which you are standing
thinking whether you want to breathe or not;
it anyway gives.
It’s up to you whether you want to breathe or not.
The tree doesn’t make the choice;
it just gives;
how much you want to breathe is up to you.
So they may not receive it properly;
so I will not give.
Don’t get into this kind of rubbish.
It’s your thing to give.
If they have sense, they may receive it.
If they know - don’t need your rubbish, they may not receive it.
They don’t need it.
They may be self-contained.
They may not need it.
or they may not have the sense to receive it.
It doesn’t matter; that’s not for you.
You know the joy of constantly doing it, that’s all.
Questioner: Sadhguru, I’m having a hard time with devotion
and I’ve been reading everything I can find about things you’ve said
and driving everyone around here crazy asking all of them,
‘What’s devotion?
What’s devotion?’
I am hoping that you can explain it to me in a way that I understand (Laughs).
Sadhguru: (Laughs) You want to understand devotion
or you want to know devotion?
Hmm?
You want to know devotion.
You want to know devotion, it’s one thing;
understanding devotion is an academic thing.
Devotion means that which is devoid of you.
It’s a different dimension of intelligence,
where your intelligence has flowered to a point
you understand
If you’ve strived hard enough in your life,
you understand this body, this brain, this one (Referring to oneself)
can do only this much,
but there is something here which is much larger than this one (Referring to oneself).
If you understand this,
you will not make more and more out of yourself.
You will make less and less out of yourself.
When you become nothing, you’re naturally devout.
Devotion means you allow the Existence to flow through you,
you allow the Grace of the Existence to flow through you.
Intellect means you will divide everything into a million pieces
and you believe you have understood.
So, don’t go about trying to understand.
Do you
You know that last leaf,
that leaf which only came up two days ago?
Do you understand this leaf?
Do you?
Hmm?
Do you?
Why you’re not science graduate?
You study all the goddamn biology that’s there on this planet,
you will still not know what it is.
An ant which is crawling right now in front of you,
do you understand this ant?
Do you understand this ant fully?
No.
Do you understand a single atom in this Existence?
Even a subatomic particle, do you fully understand?
So when you realize everything is here is beyond you.
An ant, the way it is made,
the mechanics of the ant,
just see those eight legs how efficiently they’re walking
without getting tangled up.
Just the mechanical part of it, you’re not able to understand.
Leave the other aspects of it.
So if you see, everything is beyond your understanding here
from a leaf to an atom to an ant to an atom to a subatomic particle,
everything is just beyond your understanding.
Would it be not natural for you to bow down to everything that you see?
You think you’ve got it?
So now you have to
trying to understand devotion.
You cannot understand anything
but you can experience everything if you’re willing and open.
Devotion means you’re an absolutely open doorway to life.
A devotee
Once you identify yourself with your intellect,
immediately devotion looks like a stupid thing.
Of course lot of devotees are stupid,
or lot of stupid people claim they are devotees (Laughs).
Lot of idiots on the planet,
who are full of fear, claim they are devotees.
In India, it’s become synonymous –
‘bhaya-bhakti’ that means they’re uttering the word
Bhaya means fear, bhakti means devotion,
they’re uttering these two words as if they’re same.
If you are in fear, obviously there is no devotion in you.
If you are in devotion,
there just cannot be any fear in you.
There simply cannot be any fear in you
if you are in a state of devotion,
but now people understand these two things
which are diametrically opposite to each other as one thing
because it’s convenient for them.
This has become the normal understanding
because all kinds of idiots,
the most idiotic on the planet claim that they are devotees.
Stupidity is not devotion.
Devotion is a different dimension of intelligence
which has understood that intellect is a limited instrument,
with this you cannot grasp the world.
stretch this intellect to its limit,
you will clearly realize with this you can survive,
with this you can look smart in a tea party,
with this you can make money,
with this you can find a job,
but with this you cannot grasp the Existence.
It doesn’t take long to understand this.
If you understand this,
then you will naturally bow down and become a devotee.
It’s not an act,
it is absence of your rubbish,
that’s devotion.
When your rubbish stops, devotion is.
Devotion is not an act
that if you go and do pooja in a temple
or pray in a church or stand upside down,
that’s not devotion.
They’re trying to be.
Trying to work up their devotion.
Devotion means you have seen the limitations of who you are
and you have seen the boundlessness of what it is.
Compared to this and this,
it (Gestures) looks too small, too miniscule.
So naturally you will be devout,
there is no other way to be.
You understand being identified with the smallness of who you are
is the only barrier you have
and you will become devoid of yourself.
When you are devoid of yourself you are a devotee,
there is no other way.
Sadhguru: So the process
of what you call as spiritual is not a psychological process.
Your memory has nothing to do with it.
It’s a life process;
it's an existential process.
This can only happen
if you allow yourself to be just a piece of life that you are.
To do this,
we do many things here and, you know,
you might have seen people in the ashram walking around with those orange tags.
If you have seen the silence tags people are wearing
just shut up.
Because,
shutting your mouth is only half the job;
to become silent
is possible
only when you do not think much of yourself.
If you think something about yourself,
if you think ‘I am smart’
how can you shut up?
you tell me
If you think ‘I am smart’ how can you shut up?
If you realize that you are actually stupid,
you don't know anything in this existence
then
isn't it?
Then you can simply look at life with great sense of wonder,
without a thought appearing in your mind.
If you think you are smart about everything,
you got explanations and calculations and nonsense going on in your head.
If you see one thing, a thousand thoughts will go off, isn't it?
You are not sitting here in this sathsang totally silent;
you are agreeing with me,
disagreeing with me,
making comments within yourself,
making comments about the clothes that somebody is wearing next to you,
appreciating it,
depreciating it,
everything is happening.
Am I wrong?
Because the moment you think there is some value to what you think
then you can't stop it;
no way to stop it.
It’ll just go on and on and on.
When you see there is absolutely no life value
to your thought process;
it is just memory recycling itself,
it is just the same old nonsense recycling itself
but if you are excited,
if you are enamored by this recycle,
if you think it's great you cannot stop it.
If you see the patterns of what it is,
if you see the stupidity of what it is,
then slowly you will distance yourself and it’ll collapse
because without attention it cannot go on.
Manisha Koirala: Me, being an actor
and coming from
performing arts and creative field,
how important is meditation
in performing arts,
in direction,
acting,
theater?
Sadhguru: See, I think people go into
art and music
because unconsciously, somewhere,
they touch moments of meditativeness
in what they’re doing.
If that element is not there,
I don’t think
music,
art,
all these things, would be worthwhile.
Somewhere, there are moments of meditativeness.
So, let me take away the word meditation
because the word meditation
in English language doesn’t mean anything.
If I sit with my eyes closed,
I can do
japa,
tapa,
dharana,
dhyana,
samadhi,
shoonya,
any number of things (Laughs).
But in English language,
if I sit with my eyes closed,
they will say,
“He is meditating.”
By closing my eyes,
I could be doing any one of those things,
or you might have just mastered
the art of sleeping in vertical postures (Laughter),
you know.
People learn this in conferences (Laughter).
That’s why the lighting is kept like this, you know (Laughter).
Manisha Koirala: Yeah, so that they can't see.
Sadhguru: …to not to disturb
the rear section of the hall (Laughter).
So, meditativeness means in some way,
if you sit here,
your mind is out here (Gestures),
your body is here (Gestures),
what you experience as myself is
little away from these two things.
That means you found a little space
between yourself and your body,
between yourself and your mind.
There are only two problems
There are two kinds of sufferings in your life –
physical and mental.
Do you know of any other kind of suffering?
No.
Once there is a space
between you and your body,
between you and your mind,
this is the end of suffering.
Once there is no fear of suffering, that,
“No matter what happens, this is how I will be,”
once that assurance is there within you,
then you will walk your life full stride.
Whether creativity,
or industry,
or business,
or whatever kind of life,
you will walk full stride.
When there is fear of suffering,
you will take only half-steps and it’s
Manisha Koirala: When do… How do I become that, Guruji (Both laugh)?
How…?
Sadhguru: Start
Start a simple process called Inner Engineering.
What we need is thirty hours of focused time.
We format it in different ways –
in seven days,
in three days,
three full days and many different ways –
but we actually need is thirty hours of focused time.
We create a… a vehicle for you,
so that you can turn inward.
Why I’m saying you need a vehicle to turn inward is –
right now,
the five sense organs,
which are the only means of perception you have
Seeing,
hearing,
smelling,
tasting,
touching –
this i’s the only way you know life,
this is the only way you exist right now.
You know that you exist only
because you can see, hear, smell, taste and touch.
Suppose you fell asleep,
you don’t know whether the world exists or not,
or you exist or not, isn't it?
So, these sense organs are essentially outward bound,
in the sense –
you can see what is around you,
you can never roll your eyeballs inward and scan yourself.
You can hear this (Snaps his fingers),
so much activity, you cannot hear this.
If an ant crawls upon this hand,
you can feel it,
so much blood flowing, you cannot feel it.
In the very nature of things,
sense organs are outward bound.
But your experience entirely happens within you.
Right now,
do you see where I am?
Manisha Koirala: Guruji, I saw you on YouTube.
I know the conversation (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: No, no, no,
do you see me now?
Manisha Koirala: I know in my head (Laughs).
Sadhguru: You have already seen that,
yes (Laughs).
So, this image is a reflection
and happening in your mind,
within yourself.
You hear me within you,
you see me within you,
you have seen the world within you.
You have never seen, heard, tasted, touched
anything outside of you.
It all happens only within you,
never happens outside of you.
Or in other words,
the entire experience of life
is being generated from within.
When entire experience of life is being generated within,
at least what is happening within you
must happen the way you want it, isn't it (Laughs)?
The clamor in the world will not happen your way
because it's all of us put together,
this clamor.
Little bit will happen my way,
little your way,
little somebody’s way, it's fine.
But this calm is my way
because this is an internal thing.
What happens within you
must be hundred percent your way,
nobody else’s way, isn't it?
What happens outside everybody has a stake.
Manisha Koirala: But that’s the most difficult part,
to be able to
Sadhguru: It is not difficult.
Right now,
suppose I ask you to unscrew a screw in this furniture
with your hands,
what will happen?
You’ll use your nails,
you will lose them.
You’ll use your teeth and you’ll lose them,
but the screw won't come.
But if I give you a screwdriver,
effortlessly you will do it, isn't it?
So what is needed is a tool.
That’s why I said a vehicle to turn inward.
There are no tools,
that’s why people think it's so difficult.
So Inner Engineering is a tool.
It's not a teaching,
it's not a philosophy,
it's not an ideology or belief system.
It's a tool that you learn to use.
Sadhguru: The most fundamental strength of the Indian nation is
that we are a land of seekers
seekers of truth and seekers of liberation
we are not a land of believers.
We are a Godless nation.
Always,
always and always
through millennia
we’ve been told your life is your karma
that means your life is your making.
This is the fundamental strength,
and we have to bring this back,
that we are a land of seekers,
we are… don’t
we don’t believe in something that’s been told to us.
We want to seek and know it by our own experience.
It doesn’t matter
Krishna said it,
Rama said it,
Shiva said it,
Buddha said it,
it doesn’t matter,
still you have to seek.
We have
With all due respect to all of them,
we still want to know it by our experience.
The moment we give it up,
we won’t know why
We will not know why we are Indians
and we will not want to be Indians.
Right now, because in
in a very drastic way this seeking has come down in the country –
because of that,
today if the western nations open up their visa procedures,
eighty percent of the Indians
will swim across the oceans and go away.
Or in other words you are holding over eight hundred million people
within the borders of your nation forcefully.
Well, that’s a prison;
that’s not a nation.
If you want to make a nation out of this,
it’s important we get the fundamental ethos,
that we are a land of seekers.
If this seeking is not deepened,
if there is no spiritual process in us,
there is no reason why we should be together,
because we look different,
we eat different,
we dress different,
we speak different languages –
there is no reason for us to be together.
It is only this fundamental spiritual thread
which is loosely tied us together as a nation.
The moment we hack it down, it will die.
It’ll be
The very sovereignty of this nation will be untenable
the moment you hack the thread off.
So it is in the hands of young people like you
to strengthen that within yourself
and in everybody around you
and twenty percent of your wardrobe must turn Indian.
Thank you very much
(Sadhguru): Human ability to perceive
is far beyond just understanding the words.
Right now I am speaking,
your ability to perceive is actually far beyond
just the words that you hear.
But because the mind is trained right now,
not only to hear and record,
desperately trying to remember,
note down.
You know, some of you the hands are itching,
something that you think is valuable has to be written down,
but human perception goes far beyond this.
Recently, I was in
just four days,
I was in discussion with one of the top level
environmental scientist in this country
and we were just talking about it,
across the dinner we were just discussing so many things.
So, he asked,
Sadhguru what are the books that you read?
I said I read Asterix and Dennis the Menace,
that’s my rearing
I don’t get to read anything
because all the time I’m travelling.
If I read a newspaper, that’s big deal.
“Then where do you get all the information?”
I said I am picking it off you (laughter),
you did all this study,
why should I go through it again,
I don’t open all those books.
You are sitting here
and I am picking all the things
and I’m talking about it.
“But, where do you get all the technical words?”
I said, don’t you have it in your brain right now,
I can pick it off you whatever I want.
I won’t go about studying all that nonsense
because anyway the jargon doesn’t mean anything to me.
Because, human perception is way beyond that,
that’s why I am going on telling you
just be with me,
just be with me,
if you can simply be with me,
your ability to perceive this
is far more than writing down every word of what is said.
If you have all this words,
you still won’t know anything
actually.
Shall I tell you the secret?
Buy yourself an oxford dictionary,
everything that I say is already there. (Laughter)
No,
you just have to arrange it,
it doesn’t get you anywhere that way.
So, to enhance perception is very important
because only what you perceive you know.
Rest is all story and imagination, isn’t it?
What you perceive and you experientially know that is all you know,
rest are just empty stories,
it doesn’t matter how great the story is,
it is still an empty story which won’t make a difference in your life.
If it has to make a difference in your life ,
there must be an experiential dimension to it.
That will happen only if you perceive.
You heard of Vivekananda,
hmm?
Yes
He’s the first yogi who came to this country in 1893
and made a little bit of waves in those days.
So, he also went to Europe and on his way back from United States
and happened to be a guest of a German philosopher
and after dinner they met in the study
and they were discussing this and that
and there was a large book on his table
which was over 700 pages.
So, Vivekananda said
because the man was speaking very highly about the book,
he said can you give me that book for an hour.
Let me see what is there in it.
That man laughed.
He said, you know one hour you going to read this book.
I have been reading it for weeks and not getting anywhere
because it’s so complex.
And that too it’s in German language,
you don’t even know the language.
What will you with it in an hour?
Vivekananda said,
you give it to me for an hour, let me see.
So the book was given to him.
He took the book and placed it between his two hands
and just sat there with his eyes closed.
After one hour, he took the book and gave it to him
and said this doesn’t have anything significant in it. (Laughter)
That man thought this is the peak of arrogance.
You don’t even open the book and you make a comment about the book,
a book which is in a language that you do not know.
So, he was little put off by this and he said
what is this nonsense?
Vivekananda said you ask me anything about the book
I will tell you.
Okay, in page 633 what is there,
verbatim Vivekananda repeats.
You ask any page,
just number the page he will tell you what is there word by word on every page.
Then he asked how is this?
You didn’t even open the book, how is this possible?
He said that’s why they call me Vivekananda.
Viveka means perception,
his name is Narendra.
His guru called him Vivekananda because of his ability to perceive.
He said that’s why I am called Vivekananda.
So perception of life is not,
you cannot all process it through your logical mind,
it doesn’t work like that because logic will filter out.
So much of your life without which you cannot live.
Barkha Dutt: What is it with Sadhguru and motorcycles?
Sadhguru: These days, I’m on four wheels
Barkha Dutt: But you haven’t given up your love for bikes or have you?
Sadhguru: It’s just that when I was… I started, you know,
trekking in the jungles when I was ten, eleven. I would be gone.
If I had ten rupees in my pocket, I would organize my food and I’m gone
with this little note in the house.
I can imagine my parents
I… I always wished I shouldn’t have a boy ever
Barkha Dutt: Girls can run away too on bikes.
Sadhguru: They run later (Laughter/Applause).
They don’t run at ten, eleven (Laughter).
And they’re on a pillion
they’re usually pillion and if they find a good rider, no problem (Laughter).
I’m saying the thing was,
it’s not about the motorcycle or this or that,
it is just that I was a cloud of million questions all the time
and wherever I looked, nobody had a sensible answer.
Everybody has standard answers that they’ve heard from somewhere,
nobody has a genuine experiential answer.
So there’s a restlessness to explore just about anything.
When I was ten, eleven years of age,
I would be gone into the forest for three, four days.
Once food ran out and I couldn’t survive, then I would come back.
So, initially lot of excitement
but later on they kind of settled down,
they knew I’ll get back.
So when I became fourteen, fifteen, I cycled across South India,
not because I was one cycling enthusiast,
–
not like today wearing a helmet and suited booted for cycling no
simply I cycled because cycling is little faster than walking.
The moment I became seventeen, I still didn’t have a license
but I found a motor to my cycle, which became a motorcycle (Laughs).
So that because it went little faster.
It s… it supported my restlessness to know something I didn’t even know what the hell it is.
I didn’t know what I was looking for
but I had questions about anything I looked at.
Everything in the universe looked like a question mark to me.
Barkha Dutt: But the question about the motorcycle is really to ask
whether the motorcycle, the Land Rover or Land Cruiser,
which one is it now? Land Rover, Land Cruiser, I’m not sure,
but whatever, the four wheels, the helicopter, you
I think you once said somewhere that I like
that whether if it moves on land, water or air, I like it.
Sadhguru: This is not
One thing is I like anything that works and machines work (Laughs).
The more efficiently work, the better they are
and why it’s important is, after all,
what is the quality of an individual human being?
How smoothly and how efficiently your body, mind and everything functions
is the quality of a human being, isn’t it?
So machines always excited me,
whether it’s a s… bicycle or motorcycle
or because of you know lack of the necessary
probably the fitness that I was at that time,
I crisscrossed India on a motorcycle,
today it would be hard,
so you get into something little more comfortable.
Barkha Dutt: But you know while that makes you a very interesting character to observe,
did you ever worry that you’d be labeled or dubbed a Richie Rich (Referring to the cartoon character) person’s guru?
This is you know
This is the Sadhguru who
Sadhguru: See, the thing is
Barkha Dutt: …flies his own planes
Sadhguru: No
Barkha Dutt: …who likes his BMW,
who like his game of golf,
who likes having a little Frisbee match on the
(Sadhguru):Let’s… let’s come to that.
See, the thing is I would
I wouldn’t mind
I even… Sometimes we… I… I ride a bullock cart,
nobody reports that though (Laughter).
I… I… I love to handle the bulls
and I… I still drive that sometimes.
But now you… I want to have a conversation with you,
this afternoon till two o’clock, I was in Jodhpur,
I could have come by bullock cart or a camel cart,
you had to wait for five days
I came on time, you must appreciate that
Barkha Dutt: So it’s about efficiency is what you’re saying?
Sadhguru: Yes.
So I l… I personally learnt to fly a helicopter
where I don’t have the time for these things
but I somehow fit in this and learnt because
seventy percent of our work is in rural India.
I thought this little helicopter could just
I could set the place on fire
because I’m half the time stuck
Half my life, I’m on the road stuck in some traffic driving myself.
All the time, behind huge… everywhere
there’s no place in the country where there’s no traffic jams,
believe me. Even in rural India, there’re traffic jams.
So I thought a helicopter would really revolutionize our work.
I picked up the thing, I got my license,
FAA license but in India it’s so difficult to get the license
because many of these rules were made
before Wright brothers (Referring to the brothers who invented the airplane) came (Laughter).
Barkha Dutt: Well, according to some,
the plane was also made before the Wright brothers came (Laughs).
They say it was made in the Vedic ages, they
Sadhguru: They're not very wrong.
Conceptually, it was made.
Whether physically they built or not, we don’t have proof for that.
Conceptually, there’s no
Barkha Dutt: Conceptually, it’s about imagination to think
that you can move from place A to place B
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no, no, no, no. (Overlapping conversation)
You cannot conceptually imagine something entirely.
Even if you imagine,
you must be able to produce some
You must understand the principles in some way,
as to why something flies.
If you don’t understand why something flies,
it’ll be like that you know
once it happened, a little turtle, very… with great effort, climbed a tree,
went to the edge of a branch and jumped, fell flat, lot of pain.
Slowly, again he crawled up, in another two days, again up, jumped, fell down,
again up, fell down.
After a few days, two birds who were sitting in the opposite tree,
they were talking and they said,
“I think it’s time we tell him he’s adopted” (Laughter).
All right (Laughs)?
So I’m saying what cannot fly, you cannot make it fly.
People thought in detail,
as to what can fly, what cannot fly,
conceptually they thought.
Whether they built or not, we don’t know.
And is it… is it… I mean, it is an established fact,
they calculated the speed of light.
Somebody, some individual cannot calculate the speed of light just like that
if there was no whole scientific culture around him.
No individual will just drop from heaven and calculate the speed of light, okay?
There must have been a scientific culture, otherwise it won’t happen.
But we need to understand
there is a difference between science and technology.
Barkha Dutt: But there’s also a difference between science and mythology.
Some things are just great stories
that doesn’t mean they actually happened.
Sadhguru: See for example, there are
there are images or there are sketches which show,
which probably somewhere between three to four thousand years ago were made,
where it clearly shows a turtle and a round planet sitting on it and going around.
Turtle is the best example,
best analogy for a planetary movement because a turtle cannot accelerate (Laughs).
same speed, he just keeps going.
So a round planet on a turtle is the best way to describe how a planet moves around.
And the very word for geography in this country is bhoogol,
which means it’s a round planet.
So it is not because of Galileo we know it’s a round planet,
we’ve always known.
How do we know?
We can’t know just one scientific fact and not know the other aspects related to it.
So this thing about anything Indian, beating it down,
is because one thing is that culture has evolved because half the people,
their brains are in Greenwich Mean Time,
they’ve still not gotten out of the 1948, whatever happened.
We struggled for independence, we came out,
not just to send them out but to be who we are.
So, that problem is still there
and now there are upstarts who claim all kinds of things.
There has to be an even balance, not beating down this or pumping it up in a unrealistic way.
But you cannot deny Indian mind has thought about things
that nobody had thought about in those times.
There is no question about that.
But there is a distinction between science and technology.
Science can evolve because of certain intelligence,
technology needs material manifestation.
Now we are trying to claim technology, which we should not.
If we just focus on science,
many things will be attributed to India for sure.
Sadhguru: Generally all of us
have about the same-sized skull,
I’ll excuse the lady
So
to a large extent
most human beings have enough brain material in their head
everybody
except somebody who may be severely deformed at birth,
almost every average human being has
what it takes to do life.
But why is it that
one person’s brain sparkles with genius,
another person’s brain sparkles with
pain and suffering and tension and stress and whatever else?
All the ugliest things that nobody wants happens in people’s minds.
So is it a question of higher intelligence?
Is it a question of some magical influence from somewhere?
Or is it a question of bringing the necessary balance within yourself
so that you become available to the magic of life?
A skewed intelligence,
however smart it may look on the periphery
cannot make this life happen beautifully.
Above all, balance is needed -
balance on all levels
otherwise our very body and our very brain
will function against us
to a point where the only idea
or the only form of relaxation today in the world
either their sleep or drink or drug.
All you’re trying to do is to be brainless for a period of time
because brain has become such a nuisance.
If you didn’t have one you would be at least peaceful
Yes.
What took millions of years of evolution to achieve,
today has become a nuisance.
What was
What is the greatest miracle within this human frame
has become a misery manufacturing machine.
There’re many aspects to it,
I don’t
I don’t want to make it too simplistic
but above all….
above all,
the most important thing is
balance
or lack of balance.
So
this human mechanism which is
the most sophisticated instrument on the planet,
if you do not pay enough attention to it,
if it turns against you,
there is nothing here in the world which can save you
because nothing is more sophisticated than this one
Because this is of the highest level of evolution and sophistication
if this turns against you nobody can save you,
I want you to know this.
So if this should not turn against you,
it’ll… to know the entirety of what this is,
it’ll take a certain level of attention.
But to bring balance to this doesn’t take too much.
It is just that you’re doing a few fundamental things absolutely wrong –
that’s all.
To know the entirety of what this is,
that’s a whole lot of attention, time, education, assistance, guidance,
so many things are involved.
But to bring a reasonable sense of balance into you,
it doesn’t take much
you’re doing a few things basically wrong with life.
When I say basically wrong –
one thing is
for everybody to understand
all human experience is generated from within.
Is that so?
All human experience is generated from within.
So at any time if you feel happy or unhappy,
miserable, joyful, ecstatic, in a… in a state of agony,
doesn’t matter what happens
what is your experience pleasantness or unpleasantness
just to know that it’s happening from within
and it can only happen from within.
You can either take external stimuli
or you can create your own stimuli
but essentially it happens from within.
This one thing if it is not grasped
when you feel miserable,
if you think it’s this one
you’re gone.
You’re …you’re just
The keyboard is here
but you’re punching the wall –
this’s not going to work.
This one basic fundamental thing is something that
almost ninety percent of the humanity is always doing it wrong.
Whenever they feel miserable, it
they think it must this one or that one or that one
or that one –
no,
all human experience is generated from within.
If something is feeling unpleasant,
first thing is to look at this
“What am I doing wrong with this?
Am I eating wrong,
am I sleeping wrong?
am I sitting wrong,
am I breathing wrong,
is my heart beating wrong,
something, my very chemistry is wrong,
something is wrong with this
not with that
So the moment you think by kicking the wall
you can fix this one
then you made a fundamental mistake –
the harder you try the further away from it you go.
So this possibility of bringing balance to the system first of all
is the fundamental nature of yoga.
The most basic forms of yoga
whether it is… you know many of you’re doing probably
the Nadi Vibhajan
or Yoga Namaskar
or Surya Namaskar
or Surya Kriya
these are all basic forms of yoga
the first thing is to bring balance.
Once there is balance,
then you can build a tower on top of this.
If there is no balance,
whatever you build will only lead to more trouble.
The more basic you are the better it is.
So this is what a whole lot of humanity is seeking
somehow to re…remain basic,
because if you build something, it feels terrible
when there is no fundamental balance.
Anything standing up without balance is a big problem.
So the best thing is to lie down,
stay close to the ground.
If you grow tall it’ll be a problem,
so remain at the minimum.
A whole lot of humanity has reduced themselves
to a minimal possible thing in their life –
“If I don’t get into trouble that’s good enough
a whole lot of humanity.
This is a serious waste of evolutionary work.
What has happened on this planet in the last few million years
to evolve life from its simplest form to what it is today
just wasting the entire process.
And Mother Earth is not going to get you
let… let you get away with it,
you will pay the price.
If you try to make life go backwards
it will make sure you pay the price.
So instead of trying to do this, that, so many things,
first thing is to do something to bring balance.
First step is just this
that everything that I generate from within me
in the form of experience,
sensations
painful,
pleasant,
wonderful,
horrible,
whatever I go through
is essentially generated from within me
and nobody else but me.
Others may help tch, you know
others help.
If you’re miserable, some people will fuel it and help.
If you’re joyful, some people will fuel that and help.
There’re different types of people around us,
they assist you as they know their life
but essentially it is your making.
This is the fundamental aspect of yoga.
The first teaching that came out was
that it is your karma
that means it’s your making.
Your life and the experience of your life is entirely your making.
If this one thing doesn’t sink into you absolutely,
you will not make the necessary changes.
You still think
“Yes, I know it’s my karma
but you know my husband, what he did?”
Tch you can’t fix this.
First you understand this is my making,
entirely my making.
The moment you see it you have the ability to change it.
“I see it but
you know what they did to me yesterday?”
Now you can’t change it.
It doesn’t matter who did what.
What is happening within you,
your experience of your life is entirely your making –
this is your karma.
Karma means
not something that drops upon you from somewhere,
karma means your action,
it’s your making,
it’s your doing.
So, if you just set this one thing,
creating the necessary balance will happen automatically.
Once there is balance,
then you would want to try many things.
Otherwise I’m talking about so many things up there in the sky,
you will only be a spectator
you will not be the one who flies.
You will only be a spectator
because when there is no balance,
you don’t want to go three inches above the ground.
So this is one fundamental thing.
We’ve been talking about this in many forms
but if you want to make the full scope
if you want to make use of the full scope of this body and this brain,
of this human possibility,
of this consciousness that we refer to as human being,
then first thing is this
that you understand and fix it within you absolutely
that
“The quality of my life is entirely my making
and nobody else and nobody else.”.
If you fix this one thing, balance will come.
Once balance comes,
I am impatient to take you to places
where only people with balance can walk,
others cannot
Sadhguru: Gut is not the most intelligent part of your body.
It’s full of shit (Charles Assisi laughs).
It’s a fact (Both laugh).
It’s not the most intelligent part of your body.
This feeling from your gut (Laughs)
has come because
when you’re faced with a certain level of indecisiveness,
fear will come.
When fear comes, it begins to function in your gut
because fear and bowel movement are very connected.
That’s why we say, “Shit scared” (Laughs).
They’re very connected – I’m telling you (Laughs).
So, when a… indecisiveness
and a little bit of trepidation or fear enters you,
there will be movement in your belly.
Don’t think it’s an intelligent movement
but at the same time, when a certain amount of
Fear means you perceive danger.
When that comes, you become alert.
When danger is there,
a whole lot of people experience lot more alertness
than they ever know in their whole life.
Did you ever cash your… crash your car or motorcycle
or at least fall off a… bicycle?
So if you’re just about to crash something,
or you’re just about to fall off the roof,
those few moments when you thought you’re going to fall,
if you fell maybe you wouldn’t live,
but when you thought you’re going to fall,
those few moments you will see they will live up in your memory like this –
always.
After thirty years you still remember that one incident
because it’s so bright
because you were so alert in that moment.
So danger brings… alertness
or your perception of danger brings alertness.
Because of that alertness, you may see little better
than what you would have seen otherwise.
So that is how this gut thing has come.
But believe me, gut is not the most intelligent part of your body.
It’s better to use your brain (Laughs).
So when you use your brain,
there is a certain level of intelligence,
which tries to work through a situation by your own intelligence
and of course there is information from others.
One should be able to weigh these two.
“In every situation I’ll do my own thing” will be foolish.
“In every situation I will do what somebody else taught me” is also foolish.
There is no perfect balance between the two.
It depends on the nature of activity we are doing
and also the level of intelligence that you have
and the level of information that you have.
How much of information that you have is reliable
or is your intelligence more reliable than the information that you have is
there is no perfect judgment of this.
It’s different for each individual
and it’s different for each situation.
Okay, you can say it’s a certain skill
but I wouldn’t say a skill because people think they can learn it.
If it’s a skill, it can be taught.
This is not something that you thau… that you learn from somebody.
This is something that you slowly evolve.
How much of… To what extent is your intelligence more reliable
than the existing information?
This is something that you arrive at your own judgment.
For me when it – in my life –
whatever information comes, I just first dismiss it
and just look at it from my own intelligence.
If my own intelligence is not able to find its way,
only then I look at the other information
because I don’t want to clutter myself with that information
and prejudice my intelligence of looking at it in a particular way.
I want to simply look at everything the way it is.
If it doesn’t work,
if my intelligence is not sharp enough,
doesn’t have a way to pass,
then only I look at other people’s information.
Everybody need not follow this mode (Laughs).
It’s… It’s individual and it’s different for each situation;
in every situation it’s not so.
When I’m driving in a strange country,
I… usually it’s a lady’s voice
and the GPS says, “Turn left,” I turn left. “Turn right” – turn right.
Whatever she says – I don’t use my intelligence (Both laugh), okay.
So it’s a judgment that you make depending upon the area of function (Both laugh).
Time 107:19
Question: Sadhguru, you have mentioned that at one time
Nepal itself was consecrated as a full energy body.
How has this been used by the people for spiritual benefits?
Are such things possible even today?
Can even the whole planet be energized?
Sadhguru: What was the energy body, I'm sorry?
Questioner: Nepal was consecrated
Sadhguru: Oh, okay,
Nepal, okay,
This is a tremendous experiment,
a successful experiment,
that
certain beings or a group of beings of phenomenal caliber created.
A certain part of Nepal
not the whole country as it is,
because it used to be many kingdoms at one time
a certain part of Nepal was made into a
a spiritual body by itself,
establishing shrines at key points,
with all the necessary ingredients to build a body.
A body means
the body that you have right now, the physical body,
is an accumulation of food.
But to convert food into flesh and bone,
to be able to convert
a piece of bread
or a vegetable or a fruit
or whatever else you consume into human body,
there is an energy system,
there is an energy body.
So, they built a massive energy body
across the geography of a certain part of Nepal,
so that the whole population can live in a consecrated space.
This dream of wanting
every human being and every creature
that walks or crawls to live in a consecrated space
is the dream of every enlightened being.
Similar things have been attempted in Tamil Nadu
and in the southern parts of India.
Similar things were attempted in various parts of North India
but most of it has been destroyed due to invasions.
Southern India is, I would say, more intact that way.
This is a dream of every enlightened being because
it does not matter how many teachings you give,
how many practices you give,
how many methods you impart to people,
unless you create a womb
where people can naturally rejuvenate and grow
for the common populace to be able to do sadhana by themselves
beyond the natural forces
and go beyond their physicality
and attain to their highest,
it is not impossible,
it is very much possible,
but unfortunately most people would not do it
because they tend to go with the natural forces around them.
So, creating an energy body,
creating a consecrated space in such a way that
the very atmosphere around you is constantly instigating you
to go beyond your physicality -
this has always been the aim.
You will see the whole of Tamil Nadu is full of this
magnificent temples were built.
People who built these temples
they themselves lived in small hutments but they built such fabulous temples
because they realized that living in a consecrated space
is more important than living in a comfortable home.
Every street has five temples -
this is not in competition with each other,
though it may be turning out that way today.
The purpose of this is to ensure
no creature who walks this land will ever be outside a consecrated space.
This great dream
many times has reach closed to fulfillment
and many times it’s been pulled down.
Once again, we are making such an attempt.
If you ask me what’s my dream
I would like to consecrate the whole planet. (Participants Clap)
(Questioner): Sadhguru, when I come for volunteering at IE program,
my energy levels are very high
Even the same dishes when I wash at home,
I don’t feel the same energy level.
How to make my home,
my work everything
as an ashram?
(Sadhguru): You should give it all away to me, really.
Anyway, I am not going to come and eat in your house every day,
but in your mind you must give it away.
Because here you are doing it as an offering,
it's a beautiful thing.
There, you are doing it as a chore, it's an ugly thing.
Both the same work, it's just you, isn't it?
Same dishes,
same work,
just you who can make it either miserable or joyful.
So, even what you do at home and office,
why don’t you do it as an offering?
What's stopping you?
I won't ask for your
I won't come and steal your salary,
I won't come and eat your food;
why don’t you just do it as an offering?
It’ll work beautifully.
It will work beautiful not only because your mindset has changed,
above all you become receptive for Grace.
That’s the most significant thing;
that is the most important thing in your life
to become available to Grace.
If that one thing is not there, this is an uphill task
uphill task,
quite an impossible task.
I won't say it's impossible,
but torturous.
If you go with Grace,
you glide effortlessly,
joyfully.
If you try to walk,
then it is a very torturous journey.
I didn’t see what's the point
in anybody making the process of life unpleasant for themselves.
We do not know what big things you will become in your life
whether you are going to climb Mount Everest or not,
whether you are going to run 100 meters in eight… no,
we should talk seven seconds or not,
whether you are going to beat the bolt or not,
whether… you are going to become a billionaire or not,
we do not know,
but this one thing - you deserve that the process of life
was a pleasant experience for you,
this one thing must happen to you, isn't it?
This one thing every human being deserves. Isn't it so?
Hum?
Other things according to their capabilities;
all the other things accordingly to their capabilities.
This one thing every human being deserves
that you make the experience of life into a pleasant process.
This much must happen, isn't it?
Other things we don't know;
they may happen,
they may not happen because they are subject to various realities;
not just you.
Those situations are not just you, isn't it?
Those situations are so many things.
This one thing you can do it.
If this one thing happens,
life is beautiful;
according to our capabilities, each one will do whatever we can do.
That's all there is to life, isn't it?
But this one thing should happen.
So, you must be a volunteer, always.
What a
being a volunteer means is
to volunteer means you’re doing your life willingly.
That's all it means.
Right now if you say I am a volunteer,
what it means is
I am doing whatever I am doing willingly.
Yes?
So this is all the choice you have;
you can either do your life willingly or unwillingly.
If you do it willingly,
it becomes a love affair.
If you do it unwillingly,
it becomes a rape.
If you do it willingly,
it becomes your heaven;
if you do it unwillingly, it will become your hell.
Yes?
That’s all the difference, isn't it?
Anything that you are doing in your life,
if you are doing it willingly,
it's a beautiful thing;
if it’s happening to you unwillingly, it's a horrible thing.
Isn't it so?
So being a volunteer does not mean
washing dishes,
does not mean cutting vegetables,
does not mean this or that;
learning to become willing in all kinds of situations
that you do every moment of your life willingly,
not unwillingly because the moment unwillingness comes,
even if the most beautiful thing is happening to you,
it feels like you are being buggered by life.
Yes or no?
Unwilling
you are unwilling, but we will push you into heaven - you will suffer.
How do you know you are not already in heaven?
Is there any proof?
Is there any proof in your hands that this is not heaven?
Then?
Because you are unwilling, even the heaven is ugly.
If you are willing, it's very beautiful
and only if you are willing, you become available to Grace;
otherwise you have to plod every step,
which is not easy.
Rivers have been the lifelines of this nation and of every nation in a way
We are a culture a civilization which have grown out of a river bank
All Rivers in India are at a dangerous level depletion
That means in another 15 to 20 years time most of our rivers will be seasonal they will not be perennial
If you just fly over india you look down, you will see entire India looks like brown desert
All the rivers are drying up like this Krishna is not touching the ocean almost four months
Kaveri two and a half months to three months. It doesn't touch the ocean
When the rain comes it floods otherwise there is nothing
Everywhere which is flown four million years in one generation if we collect
Air Cavalry Amira and reverse illegal re-entrants juan
Rodriguez onion an area where over and I go for the photography can't you see
And what is carefully impossibly hard that user Id restricted for thin people to literally dig up a river in search of water the last
Four to five years the river has been on Regina do other documentaries impunity
Bogota wisdom two wells as well as River is drying up in Chaplin's jumped out of
A
Time has come with how to exploit the water is gone
We need to see how to regenerate the river the rivers in this nation are essentially forest fat
forests
Red River the precipitation happens because of vegetation it is held and drop by drop
Is Let off it become small Rivers and Rivets become strange streams become rivers
So what do we have to do for this?
It's very simple for every major River one kilometer on either side there must be plantation
If it's government land forest if it's Farmland
from regular farming to horticulture
very easily
We can enhance the farmers income three to eight times
In a matter of four to six years time the farmer will need support
Economic and material support to go through this period and come out as a prosperous farmer
If this has to happen, we must make a policy we must give them subsidy
It needs a resolute political action executive action is needed policy in the month of september
We are planning a river Rally that is I am personally driving
covering sixteen states
Having major event to create a very strong awareness in the country that the rivers of this nation are dying
This has to be done in a very organized way Madhya pradesh is the first state which responded to my call
Boadicea Bass Madonna University
so Naomi, Nagata Suraj
Narmada Bachao, Lisa Jane for Philip rear Leg Anika Beyond our impunity
if our rivers depletes in our own lifetime
We are clearly making a statement that we are not interested in the future
Of our children it is heartening to see today that all of you in gradient to yes
But is abating in this moment gives us confidence that
We are not going to Destroy this nation
for thousands of years these rivers have embraced and nourished on a
Time has come when we have to embrace the river and nourish the river because the greatness of our nation
depends upon the Great Rivers in our country
Those in Central India have to walk for miles get a glass of water
We have a population of 1.3 billion people. I want you to just look at this possibility
No water
1.3 billion people
the Civil strife that will happen
What will happen to human beings when there is no water to drink you can forget about humanity something else will take Force?
every human being consumed water air everything else who land all of us community no choice about
but when it comes to doing compensatory
Action very few people are doing it
This is the disaster of planet something so fundamental as water if it ever stops on large
Tractor in will turn into graveyards if we don't do the right thing you minutes ten years 50 you stand it could be too late
If we successfully make it into your quality
this will be a
Landmark thing that happened history of Independent India so this needs to be done right in such a way
There's no ambiguity about whether it will happen or not it has to happen
This is once-in-a-lifetime not in our lives once in a lifetime in a nation's life I
Beseech all of you to participate in this whatever way you can
When I say all of you
I mean everyone who consumes water to have a rivers flowing to leave this land rich and wealth
Is the best if we can offer to the future generations of this nation this is not a protest
This is not an agitation
This is the campaign to create awareness
That our rivers are depleted everyone who consumes water must Rally for river
Sadhguru: In Southern India
there is a proverbial statement of how
a coconut tree is useful when it’s alive
and when it’s… when it’s dead.
Every part of the coconut tree is useful
even after its life.
Similarly a human being has the opportunity that
when we are alive we can be absolutely useful and contributory to life around us
and similarly we can be even after life is up.
Organ donation is such a possibility that
if we can make a difference for another life even after our life is over,
it’s a great possibility that human being should make use of.
In our culture there is no glorification after death;
within a few hours after a person’s demise, his body is anyway burnt,
cremation is the way.
So when that’s… that is so if we can make use of the dead people’s organs to transform another life
it’s definitely a wonderful thing
but there is also another dimension to this.
Every human organ is designed to last a lifetime.
Why are we developing a culture that
human organs are failing half way down?
So this is a culture that we have to develop that
individual people have to take responsibility to see that their bodies last for their lifetime.
Bringing that culture also is important.
You drink your liver to rot and then you want somebody else’s li… liver.
This could generate an unhealthy trend
and there is also a market place
which will evolve out of this
and that could open up many dangerous possibilities.
So, organ donation is a fantastic thing on the individual basis,
but on the larger context we must be conscious and careful to see that
this wonderful act of making a difference for another life
does not develop into a huge market
and bring all the other ugly things associated with it.
(Sadhguru): Large parts of India was like this at one time,
that the whole geography of the place was created like a living body.
They established, like how in the human body the energy centers are,
like this they established these bodies,
many kings sponsored these great adventures of turning their whole kingdom into a spiritual body,
Nepal is one place where it is much more alive than what you would find in India,
simply because the whole culture supported it.
Even now, for 98% of the population in Nepal,
going to the temple and seeking their mukti is still the highest thing in their mind,
which is largely lost in India.
Yes? Mukti is not the highest thing;
going to America is the highest thing. (Laughter)
So when the very psychology of a civilization was completely geared towards ultimate liberation,
these things could be done,
that the very geography could be converted into a living spiritual body.
So Pashupatinath is seen as the forehead of Shiva.
So where does Shiva fit into all this, we’ll look at that later, okay?
He creeps into everything. How, why? We’ll look at that later.
Pashupatinath is seen as the forehead of Shiva
and his body flows,
one body to the South,
another body to the West.
One head, two bodies.
These two bodies represent two fundamental systems of tantra.
The southern body is the right hand,
and the western body is the left hand.
When I say tantra, I am not talking about the tantra that you are hearing of today.
Tantra does not mean unbridled promiscuity.
Today, the word tantra evokes all kinds of nasty things in people’s minds
because most of the information that you know about tantra is
rebound from the American shores.
Even in India if you go into any bookstore,
most of the books on tantra are written by American authors. (Laughs)
So that is not the kind of tantra I am talking about.
Tantra means a technique or a knowledge or a certain technology
of being able to unmake life and make life again. ?
Those of you who come from India and maybe
you have spent little time to look at the calendar art in India,
you would have seen that sometimes there is a yogi
or sometimes a woman who has taken off her head or his head,
placed it in their hand and walking. Have you seen this picture?
So this basic tantric imagery is to tell you
that this is about the mechanics of life,
understanding this machine so perfectly that you can completely dismantle it and put it back.
So based on this
When I use the word tantra, I want you to understand from this context,
not from
In this context they created two tantric bodies with one head.
The forehead is here, in Pashupatinath.
The Sahasrar, the top of the head, is in Kalpanath,
what is above is in the Muktinath,
what is beyond is Kailash.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Sadhguru, welcome to Yale!
Sadhguru: Thank you (Laughs).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: What a delight,
what a joy to have you here.
You are among friends and it seems (Sadhguru laughs)
that there are many who know of your work
and there are many who don’t.
Sadhguru: You are a highly educated man and I’m...
but I’m devoid of education,
so you have to (Laughter)...
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Well, you know, as...
Sadhguru: ...make some allowances for me.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: That’s lovely of you to say.
I was so well educated,
I have rediscovered a joyful curiosity.
And while it is true I have many degrees after my name,
as I’ve lost my hair and become more wrinkly (Sadhguru laughs),
I’ve so enjoyed the spirit of joyful curiosity.
So in the spirit of hospitality,
in the spirit of joyful curiosity
and coming together across traditions,
I would love to hear your thoughts on a number of topics.
The one that is near and dear to my heart,
as an educator
and as a physician and a pastor,
is this area of wellness and burnout.
Physicians today
a big study came out –
fifty-four percent of physicians in America meet criteria for burnout.
And nurses are in the same boat.
And you’re here at a medical school
and we’re looking for answers
and we’re looking for hope.
And so, to those fifty-four percent of physicians who are burned out,
and the nurses and PAs and nurse practitioners,
all of us in healthcare,
what would you say to them?
Sadhguru: If we have to bring health,
either to ourselves or to others,
one fundamental thing is,
you bring a very profound sense of wholeness into you –
the various dimensions of life that we are,
all of it is in sync and functioning well.
It’s sad to hear that
physicians are in a state of burnout.
How would they cause health?
They could sell more medicine,
but they cannot cause health if they are in a state of burnout.
Now we’re seeing, as modern medicine progresses,
comes out with miracle after miracle,
research, all kinds of things,
but people are not getting healthy.
More people are getting sick than ever before.
A country like United States,
which is the most affluent country on the planet,
which essentially means you have a choice of nourishments,
every human being has a choice of nourishment.
Most of the ailment that you see in other parts of the world
are nourishment related in some way
because the needed nourishment is not there at the right time
for a whole lot of people on this planet.
But in a country where there is a choice of nourishment –
I would say an excessive choice of nourishment –
a nation is spending three trillion dollars on healthcare.
This is bigger than the budgets of major nations in the world.
India’s economy is around three trillion dollars.
You’re spending that much on healthcare of a quarter-million people.
This shows somewhere we have missed health.
Maybe we have an industry going but we have missed health.
Well, we can explain it in so many ways
but doctors being under burnout
everybody thinks their profession is the most difficult one,
If... If any individual human being is creating something that they really care for,
there would be never any kind of burnout.
Myself and a whole lot of people around me,
we are seven days of the week,
twenty hours a day, three-hundred-and-sixty-five days,
this’s our schedule.
You will not see me burned out.
Maybe sometimes I’ll get physically exhausted.
Maybe I’ll die of exhaustion one day,
but definitely not of burnout or boredom.
Those two things will never happen to me.
Why I’m saying this is,
the fundamental reason why this is happening is –
particularly the physicians because
there’re various kinds of professions,
but particularly when people go to a doctor,
in some way they’re placing their life in his hands.
So when somebody is willing to place their life in your hands,
you must treat it as a sacred duty.
It’s not just a job.
It’s not just a business.
It is a...
When somebody is willing to place their life in your hands
I’m telling you, even people who live with you,
your own wife and children or husband, is not willing to place their life in your hands completely
(Laughter).
But somebody, an unknown person comes and places his life in your hands,
I think it’s a greatest privilege that somebody trusts you at that level,
that they’re willing to trust you with life.
You could do right things or wrong things,
knowingly or unknowingly.
Because nobody has figured the human body absolutely, all right?
We know it to some extent.
So you may do any number of wrong things.
But they placed their life into your hands.
I think
Traditionally, it was said like this in India,
“In any given society,
if education,
medicine
and spiritual process,
if it gets commercialized,
that society will go down the drain.”
I think we’re doing this to the entire modern world,
all three are becoming commercialized.
There’s nothing wrong with commerce.
Commerce is a...
a transaction of give and take.
You give me this, I’ll give you that.
But there are some things, which cannot be handled as just give and take.
If you bring this aspect of transaction into spiritual process,
into education
and into medicine,
then it turns ugly.
And that ugliness will definitely burn you out one way or the other.
Above all, what people are experiencing as burnout is –
first of all, they’re doing something that they don’t care for.
If they were genuinely doing something that they truly care for,
there would be no burnout.
The more opportunity you get to do it,
the better it would be, isn’t it?
Everything is towards a certain end.
The joy of doing what you’re doing is not there in one’s life.
This is not just for any one profession, it’s for all professions,
but particularly in a profession like this,
where it’s a question of life and death for somebody else.
When it’s a question of life and death for the person who is sitting in front of you,
it can't be a transaction for you.
Well, there is a business end to everything
because to make anything sustainable,
there has to be a business end to it.
We are not against the business end of it.
But within yourself,
if you don’t do it as a great offering to the person who is sitting in front of you –
of course, they will pay their fee,
but within yourself, if you are not like this –
definitely you will burnout doing this kind of work.
Otherwise, every day if you helped a person,
if in some way you made somebody’s life...
their life better,
by the end of the day, should you be ballooned into a joyful state,
or should be in a state of burnout at the end of the day?
It should not be a burnout
if you genuinely experienced you have enhanced many lives around you.
This is not about service,
this is not about ideas of “I served this, I did this” -
no.
There is a joy within a human being
when they’re able to touch another life.
Why you are holding a few people dear to you as family is
because you believe you can touch their life in some way.
You can make a difference.
That is what is most important for a human being.
In every activity that we perform,
whatever the nature of the activity,
how profoundly we can touch someone else,
this is what makes the big difference.
If you make a movie,
you don’t want to make a movie which nobody wants to watch, would you?
You want people to watch this movie and come to tears, isn’t it?
You don’t want to build a house that nobody wants to live in.
You don’t want to cook something that nobody wants to eat.
These things you can do only because
in some way you are able to touch another life through your activity.
This is most fundamental need within the human being.
And as a physician,
you have a phenomenal opportunity of touching lives like very other...
very few other professions can do.
And this should not lead to burnout
but this is happening so because
we’re trying to treat it like a transaction.
And the most fundamental thing that we have not understood in this process is
that human experience is caused from within,
not from outside.
Your joy and misery,
your pain and pleasure,
your agony and ecstasy,
even light and darkness right now is happening only within you.
It never happens around you.
What happens within you,
if you try to fix it by fixing what is around you,
you will go bonkers in no time.
I am surprised why only fifty-four percent (Laughter).
Because if you don’t understand human experience is caused from within
Especially medical professionals,
who in some way have delved into the nature of human physiology
and I believe to some extent the mind,
we must know that every aspect of human experience comes from within.
And today,
modern medicine especially,
unlike the traditional medicine,
is entirely chemical fixes for everything.
So you understand that both health and illness is happening because of chemistry.
Joy and misery is a certain chemistry,
different types of chemistry.
Ecstasy and agony are different types of chemistry.
Or in other words, we are a chemical soup.
The question is only,
are you a great soup or a lousy soup (Laughter)?
Now if I give soup-making ingredients to all of you,
do you believe all of you will come with the same kind of soup?
Hmm?
You will come with hundred different varieties of soups.
So there is something called as the skill of soup-making.
All of us have come with the same fundamental ingredients of life,
see in how many ways we have become.
And only fifty-four percent are getting burnt out.
Handling life so wrong,
hundred percent should be burnt out.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So let’s talk about making soup (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So...
Sadhguru: No, don’t go into this area, I’m a very good cook (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Okay. We’ll talk
So, this soup of life, if you will
So, you know, tonight,
there is a nurse or a physician, who has come home
and they told a family member that their loved one just died,
or they treated a child who’s undergoing chemotherapy,
or they were in a clinic
where they’re taking care of someone who doesn’t have enough insurance to cover that medication.
And so those good folks have come home
and their spirits are broken.
And they love what they do.
I think burned-out physicians love what they do –
they do.
And I like that metaphor of soup-making.
What can we do?
And so what can we do (Sadhguru laughs)?
What can that nurse, that physician assistant, that doc,
what...
Saturday morning comes around, they wake up, what should they do?
Sadhguru: I... I can teach you a way of making your chemistry into a blissful chemistry.
That means you’re blissful by your own nature,
not because of something that happened around you.
This is exactly what I’m saying.
What this question implies is,
what happens around you determines what happens within you.
The significance of being human is this,
that,
“What happens within me, I can create around me.
If what happens around me makes me,
I am still in animal nature.”
A human being means,
“I do all the same things that the animal does
but I can do all of it consciously”,
that is the big part of being human.
Well, you are born like any other creature,
you grow up, you eat, you sleep, maybe you reproduce and you die one day.
This is what every creature does.
This is what you and me do.
But we can do it consciously,
which includes your thought, your emotion, everything.
To put this very simply,
it amazes me that people are twenty, thirty, fifty, sixty years of age,
they still do not know how to handle their thought
and how to handle their emotion.
This is a huge disability in the world (Laughs).
If you don’t know how to use your hands,
would you call that a disability?
If you don’t know how to manage your thought,
how to manage your emotion,
is it not a disability?
Just because everybody is in the same condition,
it does not become normal (Laughter).
So, essentially,
you are...
you have made a choice of dealing with people,
who are sick or dying.
It is a choice.
And it is a privilege that those who are unwell –
being unwell means
you are no more hundred percent on your feet,
you need somebody’s help –
such people
and those who are dying in some way,
they’re willing to trust you and put their life into your hands.
It’s a great privilege.
Well, in this,
there are many things to do.
As you gave examples,
that you have to convey something unpleasant to somebody,
sometimes you are not able to treat them
because either you have no time,
or they have no money or whatever.
These are there,
I’m not questioning this.
But the most important aspect of this is,
if you want to bring well-being to somebody,
you must know how to be well, isn’t it?
Otherwise, how would you do it, I’m asking?
How?
How would you create well-being to someone
when you do not know how to be well?
What this implies is,
“If I have to be well, the world has to be perfect.”
Well, you’re not going to be well (Laughter).
Because even if you’re just two people in the family,
not everything happens the way you think it should happen, isn’t it?
Hello?
You can tell me, it’s okay (Laughter).
Even if you’re just two people,
not everything will ever happen to you hundred percent the way you want it.
Fifty-one percent if it’s happening your way,
you have the controlling stake (Laughter).
Anything more if you expect, you’ll have a divorce (Laughter).
Yes?
So, outside will never happen hundred percent the way you want it.
Or in other words,
if you expect the outside to be hundred percent the way you want it,
you’re just not equipped to live here in this world.
Yes or no?
If you’re expecting the external situations to go hundred percent my way,
obviously I’m not equipped to live in this world.
You know we are a volunteer organization,
over 4000 full-time volunteers,
over three-million part-time volunteers.
Every day somebody is coming up to me and saying,
“Sadhguru, I can’t take her anymore, I can't take it.
This person, I can’t work with this person.
This man is like this, this woman is like that.”
I tell them,
“See, this is the kind of people that exist in the world.
If you think what you’re doing is very significant,
you’ve got to work with these people,
however they are.
If you want to work with ideal people,
you must go to heaven, and today” (Laughter).
These are our realities.
If you truly see, genuinely see that
“what I’m doing is significant”,
it’s of significant...
it’s significant enough to make difference in lives around me,
now you have to do that work.
The problem is not of the nature of your work.
You just ask anybody, from the topmost job down to the most menial job,
everybody complains about stress.
So stress is not about your job.
I must tell you this.
A few years ago, many years ago,
when I first came to United States,
wherever I went, people were talking about stress management.
I couldn’t understand this
because in my understanding,
we manage whatever is precious to us,
our family, our wealth, our business, our money.
Why would anybody want to manage stress (Laughter)?
It took me a while to understand,
people have concluded that stress is a part of their life.
Stress is not a part of your life,
it’s just your inability to manage your own thought,
your own emotion, your own energies and your own body.
If you knew...
If your mind took instructions from you,
would you live in stress or in bliss?
Please tell me.
Participants: Bliss.
Sadhguru: What’s your choice?
Yes.
Such a simple thing is not happening because
your mind is not even taking instructions from you.
If your intelligence turns against you, who the hell can save you (Laughter)?
So this anxiety, this stress is not about the job,
it is just that
our education systems are such,
they are telling you how to conquer the world, you know,
how to break an invisible atom,
how to go beyond space,
but they’re not telling you a thing about this one (Referring to oneself).
This (Referring to oneself) is the most complex -
if you want to call it a human mechanism -
this (Referring to oneself) is the most complex and sophisticated mechanism you have seen.
Yes?
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Yes.
Sadhguru: As a doctor, you know.
But I’m asking,
even the doctors,
have they read the user’s manual (Few laugh),
how to use this (Referring to oneself)?
No?
Just by accident, something.
When you live by accident,
anxiety is natural.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So I was really interested in the title of your book –
Inner Engineering (Sadhguru laughs) –
A Yogi’s Guide to Joy.
And those are some words that you don’t usually see often so close together.
I’m thinking about engineering...
Sadhguru: And joy (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: ...and joy...
Sadhguru: ...and a yogi. And a yogi (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: And a yogi, right.
Engineering, yogi, you know.
And I like that word engineering.
You need to know, there are some really...
some of the top engineers at the University are in the audience tonight.
Sadhguru: Yesterday was the engineer’s...
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: They’re right there...
Sadhguru: Yesterday was the World Engineer’s Day (Laughs).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Yeah, so what’s the...
what’s the theme of...
What would you say is the message of this?
I mean, I think you’re getting at that.
Inner Engineering (Sadhguru laughs) –
A Yogi’s Guide to Joy.
What does that mean?
Sadhguru: See, if you...
if you and me were here let’s say a hundred years ago
or two hundred years ago,
how the world was and how it is today,
it is almost another world.
It’s not the same world.
You wouldn’t have recognized it, that’s how much it has changed.
What changed this?
Our ability to engineer external situations the way we want it.
We could sit outside and do this
but now we’re sitting in this building because this is engineered for our comfort.
Now, engineering essentially means
making something just the way we want it.
We made everything in the world the way we want it,
but now fifty-four percent burnout (Laughter)
because we did not make this one thing (Referring to oneself) the way we want it.
If we made this one thing (Referring to oneself) the way we want it,
again the same question –
would you live blissfully or miserably?
If you made this (Referring to oneself) the way you want it,
you would definitely make this blissful,
highest level of pleasantness for yourself.
What you want for your neighbor may be debatable (Laughter)
but what you want for yourself is very clear, isn’t it?
So, this is not happening because
we have never approached inner well-being in a scientific manner.
We are thinking something else from somewhere is going to fix this.
If we want to be well, we looked up.
In India, they call this uparwala.
That means the one above.
I’m saying,
is it true that you are living on a round planet?
Hello?
Is it a round planet that we are living on?
Sadhguru: And on top of it, it’s spinning.
If you look up, you’re invariably looking up in the wrong direction, isn’t it (Laughter)?
I’m (Laughter)
You must go to Australia (Laughter) to look up the right way.
So I’m saying we are simply even incapable of knowing what is up and down in this universe.
Is it somewhere marked in this cosmos –
this side up (Laughter)?
We not only do not know, we cannot know, isn’t it?
So we don’t even know which is up, which is down.
We do not know what is forward, what is backward.
We really do not know what is east, what is west.
For convenience, we made up things.
But there is one thing that you can know. Right now,
there is a perspective,
there is inward and there is outward.
We have been just busy fixing the outside.
You fix the outside as much as you want,
all you will get is comfort and convenience,
you will not get well-being.
If well-being has to happen,
you have to engineer your interiority the way you want it.
Only when this (Referring to oneself) becomes the way you want,
now this will be joyful.
“If outside becomes the way I want, there will be comfort.”
You have to admit this –
never before in the history of humanity,
any other generation knew the kind of comforts and convenience
that you and me are enjoying right now.
Yes or no?
Hmm?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: We are the most comfortable generation ever,
but we are whining like crazy (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Let’s talk about the inner life and the outer life.
One thing that strikes me as so powerful about your mission in the world is
that you seem to successfully broker both of those worlds...
Sadhguru: Oh, bro... you must take off the word broker (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: I guess...
How to say...
You successfully pursue both of those worlds,
if you will.
The Isha Foundation educates the young and plants trees.
And then you also teach people about Inner Engineering.
And I think that could be a challenge for
“we” in the West.
We in the West perhaps love the outer world
and maybe at the expense of the inner world.
But I’d love to hear your perspective on that.
Sadhguru: See all these massive projects of health,
education and ecology that we’re doing in southern India
have mainly happened only because of an inner experience.
There’re millions of people who had a powerful inner experience.
It’s out of that we are able to generate this action.
Because these massive projects are all completely done by a volunteer force.
Volunteers means (Laughs)
nobody’s trained for the job (Laughter).
And (Laughs)
And you cannot fire them for inefficiency (Laughter) because they’re volunteers (Applause).
At the same time,
even if they’re holding a key position,
at any time without notice they can just vanish (Laughter).
You manage an organization like this, you will go crazy in no time.
That’s my job (Laughter).
So (Laughs) having described my job,
which is a sure route to madness (Laughter),
if I was not as well established as I am within myself,
it would have driven me bonkers.
Because I’ve managed businesses before
and at that time,
I used to wield my authority on people to get things going.
And the main thing was, they were on my
you know,
I was doing the payment for them.
That was the main control.
Now I don’t make any payment for anybody,
everybody is not paid,
nobody is paid.
In fact, they spend their own money and come and do everything.
To keep them going is essentially the inner engineering.
Because there is a powerful experience within,
which drives them to do all this work.
It is...
It is unfortunate that people always trying to divide the world.
You must understand this,
that the very basic nature of human intellect is this
Human intellect – you know, all of you –
the sharper it is, the better it is. Isn’t it so?
You should agree with me (Laughter).
The sharper it is, the better it is, I think, intellect.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: I actually wanna talk about being a prophet.
Sadhguru: Hey, don’t go that far, let’s finish the project (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Let’s go there.
So, because one of the things about sort of
be mindful of the inner life...
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating negation).
You cannot be mindful of the inner life.
Now you talked about being a prophet,
now I can say no (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So I don't think...
I wouldn’t say you’re a prophet,
I’m talking about the Judeo-Christian tradition of prophecy...
Sadhguru: Oh!
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: ...so in the Hebrew Bible, in the Old Testament,
there is the role of those who speak truth to power,
who speak out against injustice,
who sacrifice themselves for a cause because of injustice.
And there in that narrative,
there is anger and there is rage.
And there are significant groups of people in the world,
in our country,
who have due cause to be angry about the world –
the refugee,
the ethnic minority,
the poor.
And one thing about inner engineering
and sort of finding peace within oneself,
the other side of that coin is,
you know what,
is there ever a time to be angry,
to march,
to be enraged at the injustice of the world?
What would you say to that?
Sadhguru: You know Che? I know you...
This is not a popular name in America.
Che Guevara said, “If you are in rage, you are one of us.”
I said, “If you are out of rage, you’re one of us” (Laughs).
If you’re really out of rage,
you’re definitely one of us.
Because you think there is a reason for your anger,
which is a wrong perception.
If you look at it,
people get terribly angry with their loved ones.
There’s a whole lot violence within the homes
because they get terribly angry with their loved ones,
somebody that they’re living with.
And they have a good reason to get angry.
Because she did not cook the breakfast properly.
Or the dog peed where it’s not supposed to pee.
Or I have seen people yelling and screaming and breaking their clubs on a golf course,
where they’re just having a good time (Laughter).
So I’m saying everybody has a reason to be angry.
Anger means just this.
When you’re angry
As a doctor, you know today that when you’re angry,
literally you’re generating poison in the system –
literally.
If you are poisoning yourself internally
And when you’re angry,
you know you do the most idiotic things in your life.
When you turn back and see, you can’t believe you did it.
But most idiotic things happen when you’re angry.
So I’m asking,
is it...
is anger an intelligent expression of human life
or an idiotic expression of human life?
Hello?
Idiotic.
So that’s all you need to know (Laughter).
The next time you’re angry, you just know you’re stupid (Laughter)
because you’re turning against yourself.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So...
Sadhguru: But... I will tell you.
The reason why this anger has been eulogized is,
in a moment of anger,
some people who were sleeping all their life propelled themselves into action
and that action produced some results.
Yes, that can happen.
It may so happen, you know,
that if I throw a stone at you,
instead of hitting you,
it hit the apple in the tree and the apple fell into your hands.
But that’s by accident.
Generally, if I throw a stone,
your head will crack.
That’s what is supposed to happen.
Yes?
So I got angry and something got done,
so I think anger is a great way of doing things.
So when you’re angry, you yell and fume at somebody.
I’m asking all of you,
how many of you enjoy being yelled at and fumed by somebody else?
Whether it’s your boss,
or your husband,
or your wife,
or your parents or anybody,
you really thoroughly enjoyed this (Laughter).
Hello?
Did you?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: No.
And what makes you think somebody else enjoys it?
They endure you,
they don’t enjoy you.
And when they’re done, they’re done (Laughs).
So, it doesn’t matter
whether the anger happened to a man that you call as a prophet,
because we have a way of eulogizing everything
which...
with which we have a distance of time.
Suddenly anything which is over 1000 years becomes sacred in most people’s mind.
But whatever is happening right now,
however great it is,
they don’t have the intelligence to recognize this.
People are saying the past things are great
simply because everybody else is saying it,
not because they truly recognize.
But we are coming to a time,
if you don’t do it,
your children will do this,
that is,
a time is coming in the world,
where unless it makes sense
It doesn’t come...
it doesn’t matter from what source it comes from,
even if god comes and speaks here,
the next generation will reject it
unless it makes sense to them.
This is a good development because
instead of authority being the truth,
truth is becoming the authority.
It’s a good way to go.
But once this happens,
questions are going to rise –
all kinds of questions.
With all due respect to every religious tradition on the planet
I come from a land,
which has immense traditions,
unbelievable.
Most...
Most people in the world,
most Indians are not even conscious of this,
how many traditions, how many ways are there in that land.
When Mark Twain came to India,
he said, “Anything that can ever be done either by man or god has been done in this land”
because the exploration is so incredible.
But with all due respect to all of them,
I say this,
that if you raise three fundamental questions,
ninety percent of the scriptural knowledge on the planet will collapse.
I’m sorry,
but this is the truth.
If you ask three pertinent questions,
you will see ninety percent of the scriptural knowledge on the planet will just collapse,
it can’t stand scrutiny.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So what are the three questions (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: You are not a scripture, so why should I (Laughs)…?
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Oh no, you said ask three questions.
Sadhguru: Yes, the fundamental questions.
If you ask, simply...
You… See, the fundamental thing is this –
you don’t know where you came from,
you don’t know where you will go.
You can believe.
If we work hard enough on you,
we can make you believe anything.
You must know this.
I was just talking to a group of people in Nashville, Tennessee,
where our center is.
I was just telling them a joke.
In the joke,
I referred to god as him.
Immediately, a few ladies stood up and said,
“Do you believe god is a man?”
I said, “Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa!”
I know what I’ve gotten into, you know (Laughs).
I said, “I was just telling you a joke.”
They said, “It doesn’t matter, you said him.”
Now this is a debate in America –
is god a man or a woman?
I think this time in the election they’re trying to settle that issue (Laughter/Applause).
But where we come from,
we have no such issue.
We have a man god,
we have a woman god,
we have a cow god,
we have an elephant god,
we have a snake god,
we have a bird god,
we have a dog god,
we have every kind.
Crawling ones,
creeping ones,
flying ones, all kinds (Laughter).
Because we are a very wise culture,
we foresaw all the future problems that may arise (Laughter).
And there is also a debate,
which in the last election they tried to settle,
but it did not settle, I think.
People are debating in southern churches –
is god black or white?
It’s a big serious debate happening.
People really debating about this –
is god white or black?
Well, you know Idi Amin, the Uganda man.
Idi Amin declared, “God is black.”
I agree with him because
if a white man can have a white god,
why can’t a black man have a black god?
But you know, these people do not know,
because in these parts of the world, only messiahs,
prophets, sons, others came.
They don’t know.
In India, we know god is brown (Laughter/Applause).
Yes?
Because god himself visited India nine times.
Are you aware of this (Laughter)?
You didn’t know?
God visited India nine times, himself.
Indians are very proud of this (Laughter)
because god visited us himself nine times
and he sent his son and messenger and others and others to other places (Laughter).
I keep reminding them, that’s because
god wanted to do the job hands on with Indians (Laughter),
he couldn’t trust anybody else with Indians (Laughter).
He came nine times and he failed (Laughter/Applause).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Let’s... Let’s talk about...
Sadhguru: No, coming to belief (Laughter), I’m saying
we can make people believe anything
if you work upon them from their childhood -
anything, believe me.
You just have to work hard enough
and make them believe this, that, everything.
Belief gives you a confidence without clarity.
Confidence without clarity is a disaster on this planet.
There is no substitute for clarity.
There is no substitute for clarity.
But if you have confidence, you can just do something just like that.
Sometimes it works.
Even if you’re not clear,
you can simply do something and it’ll work.
Can I tell you a joke?
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Please.
Sadhguru: This happened in New York City,
tch.
Late afternoon,
a eight-year-old boy came back from school.
He had a very progressive mother.
Obviously she was single (Laughter).
I’m saying they couldn’t...
nobody catch up with her (Laughter).
He came home and he asked,
“Momma, is god man or woman?”
She thought about all the gender issues
and the coming election and everything
and then she thought about it for a while and she said,
“Both.”
The boy went into deep thought.
After a little while, the boy came back and asked,
“Momma, is god black or white?”
Again she thought about all the racial issues in the country
and after considering this at length, she said,
“Both.”
The boy went into very deep thought.
Then after some time, he came back and asked,
“Momma, is god straight or gay?”
She again thought about it and then she said,
“Both.”
The boy jumped in joy,
“I got it! I got it!
It’s Michael Jackson” (Laughter)!
So how...
how we arrived at our belief has cultural backing.
Every culture has made up their own stuff.
But I’m asking,
do we genuinely know where we came from and where we’re going?
If you’re so clear where you’re going,
that is for an appointment with the Creator,
I don’t think you should postpone the appointment,
you must take it today, isn’t it?
But that’s not true.
If death is next moment, you don’t want to go.
If you are so sure
Only that fanatic who blows himself up seems to be sure.
Everybody else has a doubt, isn’t it?
Every s... working intelligence has a doubt.
Yes or no?
If you have frozen your intelligence with overriding belief systems,
then you’re going (Laughs).
Every other working intelligence,
if death is next moment,
there is hesitation or no?
For sure, isn’t it?
Because you really don’t know where you’re going.
You can believe what you want,
but you really do not know.
Belief is of social significance,
to some extent of psychological significance,
but existentially it means nothing.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Can I ask your thoughts on this?
In some ways, in many ways, we are the inheritors of our traditions
and they can... and they do influence us and shape us.
Is there a positive role for the traditions from whence we come?
For example,
if I’m gonna try to inner engineer my inner life
and try to get some direction and meaning and faith and hope and values,
I can’t do it alone.
And there are rich traditions,
Hindu traditions,
Judeo-Christian traditions,
Muslim traditions
that give some context,
some meaning,
some structure upon which to anchor my life.
What do you think about that?
Do we throw away all the traditions
and inner engineer our lives
or can we use these traditions?
Sadhguru: As you said, to anchor our lives.
Now that is...
that is the decision that every human being has to make.
Do you want to be anchored
or do you want to set sail?
That is a decision that everybody has to make.
If you’re looking for confidence,
if you’re looking for stability,
then you have to anchor yourself to something.
If you’re looking to go far,
then anchoring will not help.
Traditions,
all traditions –
with all due respect to all of them –
particularly traditions that are coming from India and also elsewhere -
I’m... I’m not in any way an expert on… to make a comment on the traditions
that you’re talking about
but essentially, tradition means this –
what somebody did yesterday is today’s culture and tradition,
what you do today is tomorrow’s culture and tradition.
I’m asking you,
how much of what we’re doing today in this world and in this country
is consciously cultured?
But all the rubbish that we do,
will become tomorrow’s culture and tradition of this land,
isn’t it so?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: I’m saying, do you believe that people who lived here 1000 years ago
were such super human beings,
they did everything perfectly and you’re doing everything wrong?
It’s not so.
They were also just people like you.
We have a way of eulogizing everything
with which we have a certain distance of time.
but are they of no value?
Not true.
There’re a whole lot of things,
whole lot of things
that we as human beings simply know today,
which is thanks to the traditions in which we have grown up.
We cannot say no.
But if you want to know this life, which is myself,
no tradition is...
Tradition can inspire you,
tradition can put you in a direction,
tradition cannot take you there,
because this has to happen now, to you, only then it’s a living reality for you.
Otherwise you will read in a book and believe it.
But how do you know this works?
I’m saying it should work.
People ask me,
“Sadhguru, how do we know whether we have met a real teacher or a guru or not?”
I just tell them,
“Look at his face, whether it’s worked for him, what he’s talking (Laughter).”
Has it worked for him?
That’s all the question.
If it’s worked for him, it doesn’t matter what it is,
you must go with him because it’s worked for him.
If it’s not worked for him, what is the point?
Dead tradition.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So one of the traditions here in a medical school,
in a Western medical school,
is the tradition of the evidence –
show me!
In this tradition,
which is only really maybe two or three hundred years old,
the randomized controlled trial,
the cohort study, the… all of that.
And it’s good,
that’s how we’ve gotten cures for pneumonia
and drugs to help alleviate pain
and it’s all been done through this pursuit of the evidence.
The evidence...
and also I’m a pastor
and I fully embrace the life of the spirit
and the truth that we find in our faith traditions,
and I love that tradition.
But I do recognize a tension,
if you will,
between the truth that we discover in the lab
and the truth that we discover in our spirit.
And I love that tension,
I think that’s a great way to live in a way,
that sort of loving and joyful pursuit that is
both the truth that I see around me and the love that grows in my heart.
But I do recognize the tension.
What is your perception of that?
Sadhguru: See, when we talk about the evidence-based approach,
it is not a tradition.
When it happened,
when the Renaissance happened, it was breaking of all traditions.
Till then, because it was written in a book,
because a certain authority was espousing it,
we said, “This is it.”
When medical science evolved from Jenner (Referring to Edward Jenner, an English physician and scientist who was the pioneer of smallpox vaccine, the world's first vaccine) to others,
the fundamental thing was they broke all tradition.
So now if that is becoming a tradition,
I’m very sorry.
Because this was an exploration.
An exploration cannot be traditional.
An exploration means you’re constantly trying to step into new terrain.
That’s what an exploration is.
But if that has become traditional,
then we are treading the same track and thinking it’s exploration.
This evidence based approach has done wonders to many many things
No question
but this entire process is dependent upon human intellect.
This is what, we are just coming into
we went off little bit
human intellect by nature
I am just asking you
would you like it sharp or blunt
if you want sharp
If you have a sharp instrument let's say you have a knife in your hand
what could you do to this flower
with a knife?
you could cut it finely if you want but
you can cut into pieces
that's exactly what the intelligence does
whatever you give it it will cut it open and try to see
the way of evidence based science is disection fundamentally
Well, even in the medical school, I’m sure
we’re
in the pathology labs we are opening up,
fortunately the dead (Few laugh).
But if you really want to know somebody,
someone whom you love very much,
if you really want to know them,
I think you should dissect them to know them.
Would it work like that?
No, obviously.
So, there is one dimension of life,
which is physical in nature,
where dissection will work.
But what is physical about you,
the body that you carry,
is an accumulation that you gathered over a period of time.
It’s just the food that you’ve eaten.
It is actually a piece of the planet.
Most people don’t get this when they’re walking,
but the countless number of people who walked on this planet before you and me,
they are all topsoil today.
You and me also will be topsoil,
unless your friends choose to bury you real deep (Laughter),
fearing that you may raise from the dead (Laughter).
This is just the soil, isn’t it?
Hello?
Tch,
this is just the soil that you walk upon.
So this is an accumulation.
What you gather,
what you accumulate,
you can claim, “It is mine”,
you cannot say, “It’s me”, isn’t it?
Right now, as I’m speaking,
I say, “This is my glass.”
You will think,
“Oh, Sadhguru seems to have a problem (Few laugh).
But let’s listen, everybody says he’s wise” (Few laugh).
After some time I’ll say, “This is me.”
Then you will say, “Let’s go home” (Laughter).
Because if I claim this is me, you know it is...
it qualifies for madness, isn’t it?
Whatever you acquire,
you can say, “This is mine.”
But if you say, “This is me”, this is madness.
Yes or no?
Are there any psychiatrists?
Do I... Do this...
Does this qualify (Laughter)?
It does.
So, every day you’re doing this.
Food appeared on your plate, you said, “This is my food.”
You ate it and then you say, “It’s me.”
This is madness.
But you have enormous company (Laughter).
And we believe in democracy.
Whatever the majority says must be right.
So, it is going on.
But the moment you believe something that is not you as yourself,
you kind of lost it.
You’re derailed from life.
So, turning inward does not mean dissection,
turning inward does not mean contemplation
because the content of your body
and the content of your mind is an accumulated substance, isn’t it?
You gathered it from outside.
What you gather from outside can be yours
but can never ever be you.
So, we’re talking about Inner Engineering,
not as twisting and turning the body,
not about taking on new attitudes of love or generosity, compassion.
Whatever great values and emotions that a human being can have,
I see all that as a consequence of a certain way of being,
rather than looking at it as a means to get somewhere.
Everywhere, people are talking about whatever...
See, if you deprive somebody of something for a period of time,
simply qualities will raise to heaven.
Today, anywhere you go, people are talking,
“Peace of mind is the ultimate goal of human life.”
Why?
Because they’re freaked out in their minds (Laughter).
Why would peace be the highest goal?
Because you’re talking about Judeo-Christian thing,
the origin of where it came from
I happened to be in Tel Aviv.
I am to...
I was to get there that morning and speak at 6:30 in the evening.
I was flying in from Atlanta.
Because of some delays in the flights,
I landed there at 6:00 in the evening.
So, I’m quickly changing in the airport
because in these thirty-five years,
I’ve not been late to a single appointment.
I don’t want to break that,
so I’m rushing.
And I am famished
because I’m traveling an American airline
and there’s nothing edible on the plane (Laughter).
I’m super hungry
and I rush to the venue.
And to my joy,
I find the talk is in a fine restaurant.
life can’t get better (Laughs).
So as I went in,
people are greeting me and one man comes up and says,
“Shalom.”
I ask him, “What does it mean?”
He says, “This is the highest way of greeting.”
I said, “Well, that’s your opinion, but what does it mean?”
He said, “No, this is the highest way of greeting.”
I said, “That’s all right, but what does the word mean?”
He said, “It means peace.”
I said, “Why would peace be the highest way of greeting,
unless you’re born in Middle East” (Laughter)?
In South India,
you come up to me in the morning and say, “Peace!”
I’ll say, “What’s wrong with you” (Laughter)?
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: I’d like to get back to the practice of medicine
just for a question really.
I tell my gang,
whom I adore
My residents,
my students are close to my heart,
I adore them.
Sadhguru: All gangs are like that (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: And I say...
I say medicine is easy.
Medicine is easy
but healing is hard because in medicine,
we have our potions and if we don’t know an answer,
we do a test and if we don’t know the...
what the test means, we consult somebody.
And so medicine, in some ways,
we can distill it down,
we can make it easy.
But healing,
healing is really where the art of medicine lies.
And healing is where the spirit and the love and the suffering
and the treatments and the surgery,
that’s where it all comes together.
How would you propose that we adopt a healing attitude?
How do we bring the spirit of healing
into the experience of the bedside?
Sadhguru: Please, all of you,
don’t be offended by what I say
but you must look at this properly.
If I...
I... I don’t,
but if at any time,
if it becomes necessary I must go to a hospital,
I just want efficient treatment,
I don’t want love (Few laugh)
because I’m not deprived like that.
Now unfortunately,
we are creating a population
where everywhere people are talking about love.
We are deprived like this because
early age deprivation of love will tell right through your life.
It is very important,
we need to understand
that there is something more to this life (Referring to oneself)
than the acquired body.
We have a body, which we acquired.
There’s something more.
There is a whole tradition in India
Unfortunately, it’s rapidly vanishing because of variety of changes
that are happening in the society.
Otherwise, how a mother should deal with a child
till the child is four-and-a-half years of age.
In the...
In the vernacular languages,
it says that she should wrap herself around the child,
in every possible way.
Not
Because the food that you give the child,
the milk that you give the child is not the only nourishment.
The child needs to be wrapped with motherhood,
then only this child will grow as a full-fledged child.
Otherwise, it will grow as a deprived child.
But modern societies,
we are going to a place, which is almost impossible to deliver this.
It’s simply not possible.
In the way we have structured our families,
it’s simply not possible to do that.
So, having said that,
when people come to a hospital,
they should just look forward to efficient treatment.
Now we’re looking for love.
We should have found it somewhere else.
At least we should have bought a dog (Laughter),
if you couldn’t find anybody.
Dog is... You know,
if you get yourself a dog, twelve years guaranteed love affair (Laughter)
guaranteed.
Doesn’t matter how badly behaved you are,
still it’s guaranteed.
It’ll not work with any human being (Laughter).
There’s a whole lot of management to do with human beings.
If you get a dog,
however badly behaved you are,
you are a drunk, you behave badly,
you beat him, do what you do,
but the dog still loves you
guaranteed love affair.
So, those of you who are looking for love wherever you go,
dog is a good solution (Laughter).
When you go to a hospital,
you don’t expect your doctor to love you,
just do what he has to do (Laughs).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So that is fascinating (Sadhguru laughs)
because I think patients come to their doctors...
Sadhguru: This... This is the unfortunate
This is the unfortunate reality, that’s what I’m saying.
People come to a hospital and looking for love –
wrong place (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So when I was a
when I was a medical student,
I was the pastor of a church here in town
and I would write my sermons on hospital notepaper.
This was before EMRs (Referring to Electronic Medical Record, which is a digital version of a paper chart that contains all of a patient’s medical history).
So I’m writing my sermon at the nurse’s station
and my attending physician came up to me and he said,
“Doolittle, physicians are the priests of today.”
I said, “What?
What do you mean?
That’s offensi...” I wasn’t sure what...
Was he joking
was he serious.
And he was serious (Sadhguru laughs),
in the sense that people come to their doctor and they have pain
and maybe it’s back pain,
may be it's pain in their hearts
and I think people come to their physician
and they look for absolution
acceptance, forgiveness.
They look to feel well again.
And perhaps the critique of modern medicine is that
we are trained to give a pill but people want more.
And it’s interesting that you bring this up that in modern medicine
the expectation should be efficient care, safe care.
And that’s what we’re trying to do too.
But I do think...
Sadhguru: There is a healing
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Maybe the world is becoming more secular
and they don’t know where to turn
and so people look to their healthcare provider
for all of it.
What do you think?
Sadhguru: See, it’s not about being secular or non-secular,
a whole lot of human beings are feeling lonely.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Yes.
Sadhguru: Right from their childhood, they’ve suffered loneliness.
For variety of reasons,
changes have happened in family structure,
changes have happened in the social structure,
the communities of the past have broken.
So, there is a certain loneliness,
where even if they go to a... their car mechanic,
they want to be loved (Laughter).
You must go to your physician
just the way you went to a car mechanic,
somebody who knows how to fix the car.
That’s important.
Whether he loves you or not is not your business.
But when you talk about healing,
there’s another dimension.
We’re preparing people like this,
I’m bringing up hundreds of people,
where we have identified in the yogic culture
I mean, in the yogic science –
the fundamental life energy manifests itself in five different ways,
five fundamental ways.
These five
Out of these five...
This is called as
prana vayu,
samana vayu,
apana,
udhana
and vyana.
In this, there is one dimension called samana vayu,
which is very healing.
So, before we introduce any kind of medical knowledge to a person,
we put them on very serious inner work
to generate a certain level of samana vayu,
where a physician develops such a level of vitality,
if he walks into the room,
everything should light up.
This is very important.
Physicians are walking into the patient’s room with a grave face.
Grave is one thing that you should not point at when somebody is sick (Laughter).
Grave is one thing that you don’t show a patient.
A physician should generate such a level of vitality
and life and healthfulness about themselves,
anything they touch will get better, naturally
not because of love, not because of compassion.
People... You know,
yesterday I was being interviewed by a young lady
and she said,
“Sadhguru, we must… You know,
everything should happen out of compassion.”
I asked her, “Are you married?”
She said, “Yes, my husband is waiting in the reception.”
I said, “Suppose when you go there after this interview,
you realize
that your husband married you on a compassionate basis (Laughter),
would you like it?”
She said “No.” “
Then why do you want it for me (Laughter)?
I don’t need it too.”
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So can I ask you with...
So for the Isha Foundation,
with the thousands of full-time volunteers
and the millions of part-time volunteers,
why do you think they come?
Sadhguru: Tools of transformation.
The tools are subjective in nature.
See, right now,
we as human beings are dominating this world
only because of our ability to use tools.
Otherwise, a pack of dogs would take care of you.
Forget about the tigers and the lions
poor tigers and poor lions, who need to be saved right now.
Only because of our ability to use tools, isn’t it?
And all the tools that we developed are...
Now as a doctor,
maybe you’re using a microscope.
We have a microscope, only because we are ability...
our ability to see,
to enhance that we have a scope.
We have a telescope only to enhance our vision in some other way.
We have a telephone because we can hear.
We have a microphone because we can speak.
We have a bicycle because we can walk.
If we were made like trees,
would we have invented a bicycle, I’m asking?
Every tool that we created is only in... to enhance the already existing faculties to a higher level, isn’t it?
Everything.
Everything that we invented is just this, all the tools.
The tools are very important.
When I refer to the spiritual dimension as tools,
some of our people will feel offended around me and say,
“Sadhguru, don’t say it, it is more than our life.
Don’t use the word tool.”
Then I tell them,
“You come to the Yoga Center.
Three days I will give you plumbing job,
no spanner, no wrench, no nothing.
You do it with your hands.
You can use your teeth (Laughter).
You will see all your ten nails will be gone,
then a few teeth will be gone after three days,
then you come to me, I will give you a spanner.
Will you worship the spanner or no?”
I’m asking you.
Will you worship the spanner or no?
It is the tools.
Similarly, to turn inward,
to extend dimensions which you’re you’re
Every one of you have known peace in your life at some moment?
Hello?
You must tell me yes or no.
Sadhguru: You have known joy in your life?
Sadhguru: You have known bliss in your life?
Sadhguru: You have known ecstasy in your life,
love in your life?
You are capable of all these things,
only thing is it’s not sustainable.
One moment there, one moment here, one moment there, one moment here –
this is the only problem, isn’t it?
Suppose I gave you a tool,
subjective tool
with which you can remain blissful every moment of your life,
is it of great value to you, I’m asking?
Sadhguru: So, these millions of people,
they have tasted the tools of transformation.
One thing I have done to them is (Laughs),
I have confused the hell out of them (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So what is that tool of transformation?
How would you describe that?
Sadhguru: This is the first tool.
First thing is, you must get confused (Laughter).
Yes. Because you are talking about anchoring, that’s why I’m saying this.
Confusion means you realize that you do not know, isn’t it?
I’m asking, with all this exploration of science,
do we know even one single atom in its entirety?
Hello?
Do we?
No.
Then what’s our problem in saying we don’t know?
“I do not know” is an immense possibility.
Now, you’re trying to destroy “I do not know”
with all kinds of beliefs.
Why don’t you say, “I do not know”?
If you truly realize “I do not know”,
your intelligence will be in a active and super alert state every moment of your life.
The moment you believe, it sleeps.
It lets you sleep.
But people are not willing to go through this.
They want something.
Tell them something, they want to believe and say, “I’m fine,
I want to sleep tonight.”
No.
“I do not know...”
If you see “I do not know,”
the longing to know,
the wanting to know,
the seeking to know will happen to you.
Everything that you do not know, you just believe
because somebody said so.
Even if it is true
Right now, I’m going to tell you what is the truth,
but it’s not in your experience.
So what is the options that you have?
You can believe me or you can disbelieve me, isn’t it?
If you believe me, you will not get any closer to truth.
If you disbelieve me, you will not get any closer to truth.
It is just that if you believe me, you will have a positive story to tell.
If you disbelieve me, you will have a negative story to tell.
But you will not move an inch existentially.
Psychologically, it will give you comfort.
So this is something you must decide.
Are you looking for solace,
or are you looking for a solution?
If you’re looking for solution, then you need tools to turn inward.
If you’re looking for solace, believe something.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So if the first step is “I don’t know”,
what do you do then?
What happens after that (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: See, this happened to me when I was just four, four-and-a-half years of age.
Suddenly one day, I realized I don’t know a thing.
I was only about four-and-a-half years of age.
If somebody gave me a glass of water,
I would just sit like this for three-four hours at a stretch
because I wouldn’t know what is water.
I’m telling you, even today you don’t know what is water.
It is the only substance, which is in all the three states on the planet.
Two-thirds of your body is water,
two-thirds of the planet is water.
But you don’t know what it is.
We know how to use it but we don’t know what it is.
Isn’t it so?
We know how to use this water in so many ways
but we do not know what it really is,
because we do not know what really anything is for that matter.
So if I found a leaf,
I would simply sit like this for six-seven hours.
If I sat up in the bed,
entire night I would be staring at the darkness.
My dear father, who is a physician (Laughter),
started thinking I need psychiatric evaluation
He started saying, “This boy has lost it.
He’s just staring at something all the time.”
My problem is, I look at this and I don’t know this.
I’m not able to shift my attention to that.
I’m just looking here still.
He thought he could educate me.
He tried.
So, there is a rule, strict rule in the house
between 7:00 in the evening to 9:00, dinner time, you...
all the children, four of us siblings,
we have to sit and read some textbook.
I open my textbook like this (Laughs),
I find a little speck on the paper,
I just look at the paper (Gestures) (Laughter).
This speck keeps me engaged for two hours.
I sit like this, absolutely total attention,
without reading a word.
I went through school like this.
I was very consistent.
I always got six zeros in every test (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So if… if it’s not shalom,
or compassion or love (Sadhguru laughs)...
Sadhguru: It is just life.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: ...it’s just… what would you… is that what you say the meaning of...
Sadhguru: It’s just life.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: ...the meaning, the purpose...
Sadhguru: No, no...
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: ...your purpose of life (Sadhguru laughs) is life, what would you say?
Sadhguru: The purpose of life is life itself.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Is… Life itself is a large enough phenomena it doesn’t need another meaning.
Only because human beings have not experienced life,
they’re just a bundle of thoughts, emotions,
ideas, opinions,
identities and prejudices.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Sadhguru...
Sadhguru: Because of this, they’re looking for a meaning
because they’re psychological scape has overshadowed the existential life that they are.
Right now, all that they’re experiencing is a minimalistic mind, not life.
If you look at life,
what is the nature of life?
As you sit there,
we are breathing for sure.
Hello?
Sadhguru: Those who are not will need medical attention (Laughter).
We’re breathing.
Breathing means in some way, this life (Referring to oneself) is in communication with the entire atmosphere.
In fact, this...
this green... you know,
Project Greenhands of planting trees,
the entire movement was instigated like this by me.
I took a bunch of people,
about 3-4000 people came.
I said, “All of you should come.”
They came. I arranged a meeting in a village.
There was a big tree, a rain tree, a few... three, four trees were there,
large trees.
But I arranged the meeting around eleven o’clock in the hot sun in southern India.
So I stood there and I am speaking to them. They are all .. sitting like this.
Slowly as the sun gets hotter, hotter, they’re just wilting away.
And I’m speaking and speaking something, telling them stories
and I’m watching how they’re just wilting away.
See, walking in the sun is one thing.
If you simply sit there, it’ll just burn you down.
They’re just thinking,
“What’s happened to Sadhguru?
He’s become like this, heartless” (Laughter).
Then after about an hour-and-a-half, when they’re really going down,
then I say, “Get up all of you” and i... then I walk them under the shade of the tree.
“Ahh!”
You know what a tree is only if you sit in the sun, in hot sun, for an hour-and-a-half, two,
then walk under the tree,
it feels like paradise.
They all – “Hahh!”
I made them sit down and said,
“See, what you exhale, the trees are inhaling, what the trees exhale, you are inhaling.
Look at this.
One part of your lung is hanging out there.”
And I created a process with which they could experience this.
They just sat there like this with tears in their eyes
and that is it, Project Greenhands, twenty-seven million trees they have planted.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Yeah, very nice.
Sadhguru: Now you can’t stop them (Sadhguru laughs).
They’re planting and planting
because now they see it’s a part of them.
Is it not true that you exist here as a part of everything else?
It is just that it’s a privilege,
though you are a speck in the universe,
less than a speck,
still we are given an intellect,
we have been given senses of perception,
we can experience this like an individual.
But in reality,
if you observe yourself,
you cannot exist by yourself even for a... a nanosecond, isn’t it?
The entire universe is supporting you.
So the only way life can happen is an inclusive way.
So yoga means just this.
The word yoga means union.
Union means the boundaries of what is inward and outward, you took it away.
There is no such thing as you and the other.
If you sit here...
We can do an experiment actually.
I don’t know if time allows.
If you sit here and suppose for one moment,
you experienced all these people here as a part of yourself,
like you experience the five fingers of your hand.
How is that possible?
Well, what is this body today, yesterday it was not your body, isn’t it?
It was food.
Today it’s become body.
So something that is not you, became you, how?
Right now, there is water, this is not you.
If I drink it, does it become me?
Definitely does.
So what is it that I have done?
I included it into the boundaries of my sensations.
What is within my boundaries of sensation, I experience as myself.
What is outside of my boundaries of sensation is not me.
Now, the yogic system,
we developed a way that if you keep your energies in a certain level of exuberance,
now you will see your sensory body will expand.
If your sensory body became as large as this hall
and you experienced all these people as yourself,
after that do I have to tell you,
“Love them,
don’t hate them,
don’t kill them,
don’t harm them,
be compassionate.”
Would teachings be necessary for you?
If you experience something as a part of yourself,
after that you don’t need any morality,
you don’t need any ethic,
you don’t need any values.
What is you, you will always handle it right.
What is you, it is of the highest concern to you.
If you experienced everyone and everything as yourself,
this is what yoga means.
If one is in such a state of union,
then you call him a yogi.
If you turn and twist your body and hang upside down, you are not a yogi,
you are just doing circus (Laughter).
Yes, unfortunately, people think by turning and twisting they’re doing yoga.
No,
yoga means you sat here,
you experience the entire universe as yourself –
not as a hallucination but as a living experience,
not in the firmament of your mind but existentially you know this is you.
Now you don’t need any policy,
you don't need any morality,
you don’t need any scripture,
you don’t need any guidance from anywhere.
You will conduct this (Referring to oneself) sensibly
to the best of your intelligence and capability.
And that’s all a human being can do.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Sadhguru (Applause)
So we’ve reached...
Questioner: My question is touching back to the point which you brought up about the belief.
Can you tell a little bit more about
what’s the difference between belief and faith (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: You’re trying to gather more information (Laughter).
Questioner: As much as I can in one hour.
Sadhguru: That is the biggest problem.
You can gather as much as you want. You could
If you gather a lot, you’ll become fat.
But you will not feel enhanced.
The only thing that every life is seeking is to enhance itself to its fullest possible level.
Whether you take a worm, or an insect, or a bird or a tree,
all of them want to become full-fledged life.
Only problem is,
we know what is a full-fledged worm,
we know what is a full-fledged insect,
we know what is a full-fledged tree,
but we don’t know what is a full-fledged human being.
Now you think by acquiring more and more...
I don't know what information you gathered,
but by acquiring more and more,
you will not become more.
It has not happened, isn’t it?
People thought by acquiring money,
by acquiring wealth,
by acquiring knowledge they will become more.
They have not become more.
They’re still hankering for the same things.
So, by acquiring more information,
you will not become enhanced.
It is just that if you approach information sensibly,
you will become more hungry.
If you approach information as a way of projecting yourself as better than somebody else,
then you will think you have attained to something.
This is what happens by acquiring information.
Only in comparison, it’s valuable.
If you have certain level of information,
you need somebody around you who doesn’t know it for you to be looking smart.
Yes (Laughs)?
Today, it’s become a fashion.
Before they go to a dinner party, they will Google out
that galaxy Z67, how many million light years is it?
So when you go to a dinner party,
just like that casually you throw around (Laughter),
“You know the galaxy Z67?
It is you know how many light years?
This many light years.”
Who the hell cares (Laughter)?
Because we don’t even know in our experience what is a light year (Laughs).
It is only a mathematical calculation,
it is not really anybody’s experience.
There is no human being on this planet, past or present,
who’s ever experienced a light year.
There’s no such thing.
It is only a mathematic calculation
to somehow come to terms with the immeasurable dimensions of the existence.
We’re trying to somehow quantify it,
so that it comes into our understanding.
But nothing comes into our understanding.
As science explores more and more,
it is only getting more confounded.
The only reason why science is surviving is
because it’s throwing out useful technologies on the side.
If that was not there,
science is far more confused in hundred years of exploration than it ever was before.
But that’s a good sign.
If they had made stupid conclusions,
they would be a one more religion.
Science is confounded today.
The top physicists in the world are saying,
“We not only do not know,
we know we will never know.
” This is a good sign because
this means your intelligence will remain on an explorative mode all the time –
on an active mode,
not in a sleep mode.
So, when
when the top scientists declare,
“We will not know”,
it is not a hopeless situation.
It is a great situation that people have come to this,
that they understand if you go through physical means,
it doesn’t matter how much you explore, it’ll go on endlessly.
How much information you have, you will not get any better,
you will get only more burdened by this.
Things will happen on the side, technologies will come,
iPhone will become seven, eight, twelve, all right?
But still, the way you talk to people is not going to change (Laughs).
What you say will not change.
Your relationships will not change.
Technology can go through the ceiling
but nothing of you will be enhanced.
So, more information,
more information is not going to help.
All I want you to take –
the takeaway for you
because you want to take away something (Laughter) –
the takeaway for you is
if you truly, genuinely –
it’s not simply a thought –
allow this to sink into you in the next few days,
that if you pay attention to anything,
a leaf,
a flower,
water,
people,
dog,
animals,
anything, anything,
if you pay enough attention to anything around you,
even the closest people around you,
if you pay enough attention to them,
you will see you don’t know a damn thing about anything.
On the surface, you seem to know everything.
But if you pay sufficient attention,
you don't know a thing about anything.
Knowledge is a very limited sphere of life,
ignorance is boundless.
Enjoy that (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So, in the spirit of boundless ignorance,
does anyone else have any questions?
There’s a lot.
Maybe someone
Sadhguru: She has the microphone, yeah (Laughs).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Yeah, you got the mike, go ahead.
Questioner: Hello.
Thank you very much for a wonderful lecture
and you’re definitely very smart man (Laughter).
My question is...
Sadhguru: That’s the worst insult anybody has thrown at me (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: He started by saying he doesn’t know anything.
That was his whole (Laughter)
Questioner: Maybe this is the main sign of a smart person.
So my question is that you mentioned before that
just belief without clarity is not a good thing.
And I’m absolutely impressed by amount of volunteers,
like millions of the volunteers.
I cannot even imagine how many people come flown in and not volunteer
and so it’s a lot.
Do you think they are all driven by clarity and search for clarity?
Or they believe that once they will do Inner Engineering,
they will work on the process of gaining joy
and eventually they will have a positive story with you
or the positive story, as you mentioned before?
Thank you.
Sadhguru: See, if...
For any human being to do something,
either it should have worked for them,
or it should have worked for somebody around them.
If you want to buy a car,
either you will test drive it and see whether it works for you
or you’ll ask the opinion of your friend who is driving that particular car,
“Is this been good for you?”
Yes or no?
So I must tell you, a... as a rule,
for the first twenty, twenty-one years of my existence as a teacher,
as a rule,
I never appeared in the media –
never once (Laughs) –
to a point, where media started writing about me,
“He’s running some kind of a secret school” (Laughs)
because I refused to meet the media,
no advertisement,
no any kind of posters,
not even a brochure.
Only by word-of-mouth, millions of people came.
Because once it works for somebody,
they want it to work for their family,
their friends and things.
That’s how it happened.
In the last fifteen years or sixteen years now –
fifteen actually –
from 2001 is when you have heard about me all over
because we’re making a lot of noise in the last fifteen years,
because these projects,
which we started as small endeavors in the local area,
caught on so well and they became such major projects of planting trees,
education, health
We are active in 53,000 villages.
So, it needs enormous support,
otherwise this can't be done.
For a... a non-religious movement,
which doesn’t offer any miracles like this
Never before, as I know, in the last two hundred, three hundred years,
never before, a spiritual movement has caught on this kind of following,
where no ticket to heaven,
no miracles,
no any kind of stuff.
Only thing I’m telling them is,
badgering them that you are the source of all your troubles (Laughs),
nobody else but you.
But millions are gathering,
which is very (Laughs) fantastic because
I must tell you this.
About thirty years ago, when I conducted programs,
over eighty-five percent of the people came because of health reasons –
physical, mental ailments.
Today, on an average,
only about twelve percent of the people are coming for health reasons.
The rest are coming because they’re seeking.
They want to know.
They want to experience.
They want their lives to be touched in a deeper way than the way it is touched right now.
This is a phenomenal change that you’re seeing in the world.
It’s never before, I think.
Only twelve percent are coming for health reasons.
But at one time,
over eighty percent were coming for health reasons,
which is a big shift.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Any other question?
Maybe someone from up above there.
You’re right there in the front,
can you shout your question out?
Questioner: I was wondering if physical ailments or health-related physical ailments
can be cured by or at least helped by yoga?
Sadhguru: There are...
We must understand, there are two kinds of ailments.
In the yogic system, we look at health issues as two ways.
One is caused by external organisms,
which I think modern medicine has handled in a phenomenal way.
In fact, the birth of modern medicine happened mainly
because of the epidemics and pandemics, which were happening at that time,
where it would wipe out populations.
It is that which inspired people to experiment
and do the things that they did.
And when they found solutions, that is when suddenly the...
the trust of the population shifted from one to another,
simply because they could eliminate epidemics
and these were caused by external organisms.
But seventy percent of human ailments are on self-help.
That is, they cause it to themselves in so many ways.
For whatever reasons, knowingly, unknowingly,
they do it to themselves.
This seventy percent of ailments that people cause to themselves
can be undone from within.
But if you have an infection,
you must go to the doctor.
If you have pneumonia, you must immediately go to the doctor (Laughter).
Don’t try to do yoga (Laughter).
Now, are there instances?
We have thousands and thousands of people.
I would say hundreds and thousands of people,
who walked out of their ailments
without ever being treated for them.
We don’t treat people for yoga.
I must tell you this because we are in a medical institution.
A bunch of doctors from United States came to our Yoga Center.
We were...
We have a yogic hospital.
So, about twelve of them,
largely from this Michigan area,
and they came and stayed for three days.
And on the fourth day, they were very upset and they wanted to leave.
I was very busy, I couldn’t meet them
and somebody came and told me,
“Sadhguru, all these doctors are very upset, they want to go.”
I said, “What happened?”
“They are just very upset that there is no yogic hospital here.
You told them there is yogic hospital, they think there is no yogic hospital.”
Then I said, “Okay, let me see them” (Laughs).
Then I saw them.
They were really upset.
They were angry, they were f...
They felt cheated that there is no yogic hospital here,
where are the patients,
where are the uniformed nurses and doctors walking up and down?
I said, “See…”
At that time, on that day, maybe there were over seventy patients.
But I said, “I thought I’ll put them to good use
and I was making them work in the gardens” (Laughter).
Nobody should ever understand sickness is a reward.
They must want to get out of it as quickly as possible.
Right now, we’re treating patients in such a way,
people would want to be sick
whenever they want attention.
Not just that,
one important part of the yogic treatment is,
what is called as Bhuta Shuddhi.
This means syncing and purifying the elements within you.
Water...
Earth, water, air, fire and space.
These five dimensions you can work on,
this is the fundamentals of yoga.
So one of the most important thing is,
I want them barefoot, with open hands, to work in the garden,
to just get in touch with the earth.
Be outside,
get in touch with the air, water, earth.
Half their ailments are gone.
Treatment is there little bit,
rest is all just connection with the world around
because this (Referring to oneself) is a composite of all these things.
You remove yourself and keep yourself in a completely alien atmosphere,
where you’re not in touch,
you’re four inches above the ground all the time (Laughs).
You will lose contact with what makes your life.
It’s the very soil, which you’re carrying as your body.
Is it not important that it needs to be touched
with its origins?
No, you’re looking up.
No, your life happens from this planet.
There are other dimensions to it, of course.
But physical health and the physical nature around you
are very closely related.
If you don’t connect them,
health is an accident for most people.
Today, I see America probably has the highest incidents of allergies
Is that so?
Am I right?
Very high.
This is mainly because they’re removed from everything that’s natural.
They’re not in touch with anything that is natural.
Everything is tampered with.
Those who are living in the open,
even in America,
I’m sure they have no allergy,
they have no issue of any kind,
they’re doing fine.
I think the homeless people are the most healthy people in the end (Laughter).
They’re enduring all kinds of you know, variations in weather
and still managing pretty well without healthcare (Laughs).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: We probably have time for one more question.
In the back, right there, shout it out!
Questioner: How to look for internal peace?
Sadhguru: How to?
Questioner: How to look for internal peace?
Sadhguru: Whoa, whoa!
You just came in (Laughter)? .
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Sorry,
was that internal peace or eternal peace?
Sadhguru: Internal.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Internal peace.
Sadhguru: Okay. Now (Laughter)...
We... We’ve gone through this. Anyway,
whether it’s peace, or happiness, or joy, or love or whatever,
it can only be internal.
It can’t be external.
Now, there are many ways to address this.
But one simple way is just this –
you just have to learn where the keyboard is
for this big computer of your mind.
Right now, you don’t know where the keyboard is,
you’re punching it somehow (Gestures) (Laughter), something works.
No.
If you know where the keyboard is,
you would type out the right things, isn’t it?
Fundamentally, it’s just that your mind is not taking instructions from you.
Don’t ask for peace,
don’t ask for joy,
don’t ask for love.
Just you have to understand the mechanics of
how this body and this mind works,
and then you cause whatever you want.
If you like turmoil, cause it.
If you want love, cause it.
If you want hate, cause it. That’s up to you.
But I trust you, that if you are capable of causing pleasantness or unpleasantness within you,
you will choose the highest form of pleasantness for yourself.
I trust you on that one.
Now that... You know, it started with this fifty-four percent of doctors suffering,
which is unfortunate.
Doctors, all said and done, are rendering a very key aspect of service to any given society.
It’s very important that they are well.
I... I would like to make this offering,
that the doctors who are interested in this,
we would like to offer them the tools of Inner Engineering,
so that they go out as truly healthy, joyful
life which is full of vitality,
that their very presence is an inspiration for health,
for everybody who comes in touch with them.
This must happen.
Otherwise, what are we talking about health?
We’re talking medicine.
Medicine is a business.
Health is an aspiration for every human being.
If this fundamental aspiration is not fulfilled,
you cannot lead a human being to any other aspiration.
Right now, there is some trouble in your body,
I will talk about enlightenment,
are you interested, I’m asking?
No.
Your back is aching, I will talk enlightenment,
you’re not interested.
“Will my backache go?”
That’s the only question, isn't it?
Because body has this power.
Unless you keep your body in such a way
that you don’t know whether it is here or not...
This is what yoga means that your body becomes like breeze.
If you sit here, you don’t know whether your body is here or not.
Otherwise, if you sit here for one-and-a-half hours,
your body says, “I must go to the bathroom”,
your body says, “I must drink”,
your body says, “I must do something”
because it is in a state of compulsive needs.
If you bring it to ease on all levels,
you will not know whether body is here or not.
If you are in such a state,
you’re not even conscious whether it’s here or not,
you have no gender issues,
you don’t care whether you’re a man or a woman right now.
Yes?
It should not matter, I’m saying.
There’re only two places, where your gender should matter –
bathrooms and bedrooms (Laughter),
nowhere else.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: And some people even debate that,
which… you go to which bathroom (Laughter).
It doesn’t matter which bathroom,
so just it’s the bedroom (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: Everything is under debate (Laughter).
But I’m saying, to move the body from compulsive needs
to a place where it is like a stepping stone,
not an impediment for your life
Right now, the compulsiveness of the body is making people do all kinds of things in the world.
People are not able to raise to a place,
where they can do something other
than the compulsive things that every other creature does,
simply because they’ve not kept their body as it should be kept.
This body can be upgraded to a place,
where it will function like an antenna,
which will download the cosmos.
Even if that doesn’t happen to you right now,
the physicians of the world,
at least they must become an embodiment of health and vitality.
This must happen.
Whatever is needed from our end,
we’re willing to do for Yale and you sir, Doolittle.
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: Thank you so much.
Sadhguru: And I am Dr. Do-nothing (Laughter).
Dr. Benjamin R. Doolittle: So thank… Everybody,
let’s thank Sadhguru for his visit with us (Applause).
Thank you so much, what a great joy,
wonderful to have you.
(Questioner): Hi.
(Sadhguru): That’s okay.
(Questioner): If I am a performing artist
(Sadhguru): I’m sorry?
(Questioner): If I am a performing artist
(Sadhguru): Performing artist.
(Questioner): Yeah and …does your training and your practice and your craft
count as sadhana and if yes, is that enough?
(Sadhguru): Does …what count as sadhana?
(Questioner): My training, my practice
and my craft and every
single show that I do
or every single rehearsal or everything that goes into it.
(Sadhguru): Oh, what kind of performing artist?
(Questioner): I’m an actor
(Sadhguru): Okay.
So as you said it's an act.
See anything that you do with great involvement
does something to you, all right
but there is a difference between doing an in
an inward focused sadhana and an outward sadhana.
It's not just for an actor;
a manager can use his work as sadhana,
a gardener can use his work as sadhana,
anybody who is doing whatever with absolute involvement,
they can use it as a process of growth.
But there is a distinct difference
between doing external activity as sadhana
and internal process as sadhana.
What is the difference?
External activity as sadhana is useful
because you can do it throughout the day
and of course, you have to do some activity
making that also into a process of growth is important.
But the reason for internal sadhana,
which has nothing to do with outside is
to create that inner space within you
because your outside sadhana is subject to results.
You can't help it.
Suppose in the middle of your act,
you forgot your dialogue –
you can't say ‘This is my sadhana, I forgot and it's fine,
I’ll still enjoy and grow.’
No, you will be demolished on that day, isn't it?
So your outside sadhana is subject to
a certain level of performance
and result and appreciation
and the monetary returns and everything
but still it can be useful,
it can be working for your well-being
if you’re doing it with absolute involvement.
If there is involvement in anything –
just your breathing if you are absolutely involved –
this will become your sadhana.
Your walking, your acting, your anything
involvement makes every act into a kind of growth
but still creating an inner space is very important
because that’s not subject to anything outside.
Nobody need to clap their hands when you are meditating.
Yes.
You do your kriya,
you are not expecting somebody to appreciate you at the end of it –
it is not subject to any external reality
and that’s very important
that at least one aspect of your life is like this
it is not subject to anybody’s appreciation
or approval or whatever
but still you do it with absolute involvement,
there’ are other dimensions to it.
Apart from that,
for you as a person to do something,
which has nothing to do with anybody around you,
is an important act that you have to perform every day,
it's very important.
So if you do that well
it’ll be very easy to make your life’s activity into a sadhana.
If this inner space is not there,
life’s activity can slowly catch you up in such a way
that for lot of people
the professions and whatever else they started with great passion,
after some time,it's killing them.
It is... for most people on the planet, isn't it?
Simply because there is no inner space.
So all these in
you know I am not an expert in these things
but I remember this
because of something that came my way once
all this in one single sentence was uttered by Krishna.
He said, ‘Yogastaha Kuru Karmani’
it simply means first establish yourself within you,
then act.
Then no action is a problem –
you can fight a war,
you can act,
you can be a priest in the temple,
you can cook,
you can sweep
it doesn’t matter what you do,
but first establish yourself and do whatever you want.
He is not restricting your action.
He is saying ‘Do whatever you want.
Whatever is needed, you do
but first establish yourself within yourself,’
otherwise you’re using external activity
to make yourself who you are, which will be disastrous.
Establish who you are; then act, no problem
but if you are using your activity to make yourself into something,
if something comes in your way
which doesn’t allow you to become that,
you will be destroyed.
So don’t try to be a yogi by teaching yoga.
You become a yogi
and then if people are interested, we will teach;
otherwise we will close our eyes and sit.
The soul is sacred for people; the body is filthy, how is it possible? Yes?
That’s what we have been doing. Isn't it so? Saying God is sacred; creation is filthy, how is it possible?
The very thought of God occurred to you only because you saw creation, isn't it?
When you were born and you opened your eyes, you looked around, so much creation!
Before you came here so much has happened, obviously you did not create it,
so you thought there must be a creator. This is how you come to the creator, isn't it?
The moment you thought there must be a creator, because you are in a human form
you thought it must be a big man; a small man like me cannot do all this, it must be a big man.
Just two hands, how can he do so much creation? Must be eight hands, isn't it? Isn't it so?
If you were a buffalo you would be really thinking God is a huge buffalo.
Isn't it so? Yes or no?
You go and ask a buffalo and see, a buffalo will insist God is a huge buffalo, maybe four horns.
You know Idi Ameen, you heard of Idi Ameen, the Uganda man? Idi Ameen declared ‘God is black.’
I agree with him. If a white man can have a white God why can't a black man have a black God?
But both those people are confused, we know God is brown.
Because he visited us, you know.
Sometime ago I was talking to a group of people in Nashville in Tennessee and I was telling them a joke.
In the joke I just referred to God as ‘Him.’ Immediately a few ladies stood up,
‘Do you believe God is a man?’ I knew where it's going. I said, ‘See I...
see I am only telling you a joke.’ ‘It doesn’t matter, you said Him. Do you believe God is a man?’
They take the jokes very seriously. Now, women are arguing God could be a woman.
Such problems exist only in those cultures. In India we have man god, we have woman god,
we have cow god, we have monkey god, we have everything, every kind,
crawling one, creeping one, flying one, because we foresaw all the problems of the future.
See, when man was the most powerful force on the planet man was naturally God.
Now women are also gaining in their power so women are questioning ‘Why it… why can't it be a woman?’
So, tomorrow suppose dogs gain lot of power which they are gaining; so dogs will ask
‘Why not a dog God?’ Actually the spelling also is close, you know? He seem to be closer than you, isn't it?
So, your idea of God is just an exaggerated version of yourself, isn't it?
Your idea of God is just an exaggerated version of yourself.
See, you are still not able to define yourself, isn't it?
Whatever definition you put on yourself is not correct.
Any kind of definition you put on you it is not enough to describe this one.
When this small piece of creation is like this, the source of creation,
how are you going to put a definition on it?
You cannot define it, you cannot understand it, you can only dissolve into it.
You can experience it, you can never know it. You can't make knowledge out of it.
Whatever …knowledge you have about God is just pure nonsense, cultural nonsense.
Depending upon which kind of culture you are in, that kind of God you have, isn't it?
It can only be experienced. Experience does not mean you can eat it or you can grasp it.
No, you can experience only by dissolving in it, there is no other way.
So, we are just looking for methods of dissolution
so that we can experience something far bigger than ourselves.
So you accept the evolutionary process the way it is.
So, why shouldn't you put your head to the north?
Suppose uh, you know there's a north pole and a south pole.
This means, these are the magnetic centers.
And, you also know the whole land masses, whole continents
have been slowly being pulled towards the north. They've been traveling.
You know this?
But at least, you know geologically the whole land masses have been traveling.
Why the Himalayas is the, whatever the thing, the Himalayan mountain ranges, that Manasarovar
You will find sea shells in Manasarovar.
Because at some point it was at sea, it was at main sea level.
Today, it is at 15,600 feet.
So what transported this lakebed, which was at sea-level, to this place is
the whole Indian sub-continent is crashing
into the Central Asian (Eurasian) plate.
And this is why the Himalayan mountains are still continuing to grow.
It's just piling up. It's just a crash.
You've seen cars piling up?
Just like that.
India is crashing.
Every year, India is losing about 1.23 centimeters or so, I'm not perfect on that number.
It's somewhere in that range.
Every year, India is losing about 1.23 centimeters or something because it's crashing into the Himalayan range and it's piling up.
Because the magnetic pole of the north pole is slowly pulling all the land masses upward.
So, such a huge magnetic pole where the continents are moving up, that kind of magnetic pull is constantly in enforcement across the globe.
Suppose you had a little bit of anemia. If you went to your doctor, what does he prescribe for you?
So it seems to be, like it's an important ingredient of your blood.
Yes?
So if iron is floating around in your blood
and if I put a very powerful magnet to the top of your head
it is possible that slowly blood may start moving in that direction, isn't it?
Let's say if it's a very very powerful magnet
It may start slowly pulling it up because there is elements of iron, in the, blood.
Your body is designed like this, that your heart which is a pumping station
of the circulatory system, is 3/4ths of the way up, not halfway down.
Because, it is difficult to pump against gravity
Easier to pump towards gravity, so it's placed here.
Generally all the pipes that are flowing down are larger ones. What is going up are much finer ones. As it goes up here, they're almost hair-like.
So minute, that, the circulatory system in your brain is such, that if one extra drop enters there, hemorrhages will happen.
People have strokes.
So now you are like this.
Now you went like this.
Already there is a little bit of imbalance in the system
because heart was pumping, calculating the, gravitational resistance.
Now suddenly there is no gravitational resistance, you became like this
and now, you put your head towards the north.
Slowly, it gets pulled towards your brain.
So one thing that could happen to is you could have disturbed sleep.
If you put your head to the north and sleep you could have disturbed sleep, all kinds of dreams happening.
If you are in your old age it is possible that you can have a stroke or you could just die in your sleep.
It's very much possible. Not that if you sleep one day you will fall dead.
Every day, every day, every day if your bed is arranged that way, that every day you are sleeping put your head to the north you are asking for trouble.
Some kind of trouble, we do not know what kind of trouble you will get; that depends on the strength of your system.
If it is weak, very weak, you may fall dead.
Or you may get a stroke, or you may just get disturbed sleep. You may just have nightmares. Or during the day you act funny.
So many things will happen because excess circulation is happening in the brain when it should not be happening.
Simply because you put your head to the north.
So in case you go to South America, then you should not put your head to the south.
If you went to Australia you should not put your head to the south.
You should, you can put it to the north out there.
In the northern hemisphere you do not put your head to the north.
You can spin like a needle.
East is best.
North-east is OK.
West is alright.
South, if you must.
North, no.
Sadhguru: When we say leadership,
most of the time
any kind of leadership training is spent on
learning to manage situations,
people,
money,
property.
Yes, all this is important but
how could you
Essentially a leader means
you must be able to manage a few thousand people,
or in other words
you are trying to manage a few thousand minds.
But if you are incapable of managing this one,
this mind ,
how will you manage that mind? -
Just by chance.
When you’re managing situations by chance
you will be always freaked.
Anxiety and leadership has become synonymous today
because you are managing people by chance.
If you cannot manage this one,
managing that one is definitely by chance.
So, one of the most significant aspects of leadership
has been generally ignored
or people have acquired this out of their own natural capabilities.
When you do things accidentally,
being anxious is very natural.
And today we have enough medical evidence to prove that
if you are not in a very pleasant state of mind
then your body and your mind will never function at its optimal level.
There is substantial medical evidence towards this.
Only when you are very peaceful and blissful
your body and your mind works at its best.
And your success in this world is just this
to what extent can you harness the capabilities of this physical body
and this mind.
That’s all success is.
It doesn't matter what is the nature of your activity,
that's all it is.
Is it so?
And the most fundamental and the basic requirement
to make your body and mind work properly,
sensibly in the highest possible way is,
that if you sit here
you must be in a state of pleasantness within you.
If I ask you this simple question,
how many of you in these many years of living
have had a 24-hour stretch,
that is one single full day
where you did not have a single moment of irritation,
hesitation,
anger,
anxiety,
stress,
nothing,
you just passed through it blissfully?
How many?
Very few people can say yes to this.
Not just here,
in the whole world unfortunately.
In all these years of living,
not even a single day happened the way you want it.
Not outside, within yourself.
If your body and your mind took instructions from you,
how would you keep it,
pleasant or unpleasant?
Let me know your choices.
How would you keep it?
Participant: Pleasant.
Sadhguru: For yourself I'm saying;
I'm not talking about your neighbor.
You may have other intentions for him
but for this (Referring to oneself) one, pleasantness. Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
So, if one 24 hours did not pass in utter pleasantness,
obviously your body and your mind are not taking instructions from you.
Any instrument is truly useful to you
only if it takes instructions from you, isn't it?
Right now I'm using this microphone,
this public address,
it’s very useful to me
because it’s amplifying whatever I say.
Suppose it starts saying its own things,
I (Laughs) better not be here, isn't it?
Yes?
Your mind and your body should do what you want it to do.
And if it is doing what you want it to do
I'm 100% sure you will keep yourself in utmost blissfulness.
Can I trust you on this?
Hmm?
Can I trust you on this one thing,
that if your mind was taking instructions from you,
you would keep yourself blissful every moment of your life?
If that’s not happening
obviously it’s not taking instructions.
And there is enough scientific evidence to prove today
that only when you are blissful
your mind and body does their best.
I would say most human beings are functioning
at 15 to 20% of their natural capabilities.
If only if they could sit here in a sustained levels of pleasantness
you would see within a
for one week if you simply sit here,
simply blissful,
in one week you would be 100 or 200% more intelligent and sharp
than the way you are right now.
I’ll assure you this;
I can prove this to you,
if you give me that one week. (Laughs)
One week you just stay simply pleasant and wonderful
I think these days you are trying to do that by taking a vacation, isn't it?
Yes?
Have you noticed?
You went out and you had a good time and you were pleasant.
When you came back, you seem to function so much better.
But if vacation is the only pleasant time in our life
obviously we’re not going to be a very productive… (Laughs)isn't it?
If we do not know how to wake
make our work hours very pleasant,
we obviously are not going to be very pleasant
or very productive in our lives.
So, as there is a science and technology to create external well-being,
there is a whole science and technology to create inner well-being.
as we have paid so much attention to learn our way through the world,
we need to spend a little bit of time to find a way
through this (Referring to oneself) one.
The better you know this mechanism the better you can use it,
that’s for sure, isn't it?
That’s true with anything?
Whether you are using a computer or a cell phone or a car,
the more you know about it the better you can use it.
Isn't it so?
So, definitely that’s true with this (Referring to oneself) one too.
The more you know about this
the better you can use it.
But how much time have we spent to this?
When I say this
I'm not talking about you going and reading a book on psychology
or on your physiology. -
No.
What you call as my body
and what you call as my mind,
both these things you acquired over a period of time.
When you were born
you came with such a small body, isn't it?
Slowly you accumulated this.
What you accumulate can be yours,
can never be you.
Yes?
I'm not disputing whether it’s yours or not for now;
but what you accumulate can be yours,
can it be you?
Whatever you accumulate can be yours,
but can never become you, isn't it?
If you start thinking yourself to be something other than
what you really are,
there are bad medical terms for this;
I will not go into that.
Two cows were grazing upon an English meadow,
two English cows,
and one of the cows said,
“What is your opinion on the Mad Cow disease?”
The other said,
“I don’t care a hoot, and anyway I'm just a helicopter.”
Okay?
If you think yourself to be something other than what you are,
there are bad words for that,
I won't use such things upon you,
but it’s very very very important,
especially people who are in positions of power,
positions of responsibility,
their every action,
every thought,
every emotion that you generate has impact on many lives around you,
when you are in such a position
it’s extremely extremely important
that this (Referring to oneself) one is in a state of utter pleasantness
and well-being.
Isn't it so? Hmm?
If your life was just your own nonsense
it’s upto you.
Once you say ‘I'm a leader’ in some place,
everything that you do,
the way you think,
the way you feel,
the way you act has impact on a few thousand lives.
When that is so,
it becomes of paramount importance that you take care of this (Referring to oneself) one
in a completely different way,
not just being physically healthy;
much much more than that.
Right now unfortunately most people’s well-being is so fragile;
just about anybody can hijack it.
You went out today, and somebody told you,
“You are the most wonderful person in the world,”
and you were floating on Cloud… (Laughter)
what number?
Participants: Nine.
Sadhguru: Nine?
You do only nine? In South India we do 11, you know. (Laughter)
You were floating on whatever number cloud
and you came home and people at home told you
who you really are.
Pooff… (Laughter)
It’s a very fragile well-being. Isn't it so?
Just anybody can hijack it;
just anybody.
It doesn't take some earthshaking event to hijack your well-being,
please see.
Anything can stress you;
anything can make you anxious;
anything can make you disturbed,
anything can make you lose your sense of joy and peace.
Now, in this state,
your ability to use,
your ability to manifest the capability of who you are
is not at a very high level.
Unfortunately today
most people when they use the word ‘human’
they are always using the word human as a bundle of limitations.
If someone says,
“Oh, I'm only human”
he is not referring to the possibilities of being human,
he is not referring to the immensity of being human;
he is only referring to the limitations of being human.
Isn't it so?
Yes?
When someone says ‘I'm only human’
he is only talking about his limitations.
These limitations have become significant
mainly because of the kind of identities that one takes on,
and above all because,
even this (Referring to oneself) one is not happening the way you want it to be.
See in your life nobody happens 100% the way you want them.
Isn't it so?
Hmm?
Has anybody happened in your life?
Your parents,
your friends,
your spouse,
your children,
none of them happen 100% the way you want them.
These days not even your dog;
he does his own thing. (Laughter)
Has anybody happened 100% the way you want them?
Or are you such a hopeless romantic you’re still happening
that somebody will happen 100% the way you want them?
Nobody will happen.
They’ll happen to some extent;
if they happen 51% the way you want them you are doing great. (Laughter)
Yes? (Laughs)
Yes or no?
If people are happening
or people around you in your life are happening
51% the way you want them to be,
that means you are doing great,
your stake is good.
So, nobody happens the way you want them to be.
It doesn't matter, that’s not the real problem.
The problem is this (Referring to oneself) one is not happening the way you want him to be.
Nobody happens, it’s okay;
this one person must happen the way you want him to be.
Isn't it so?
Yes?
If this one doesn't happen it’s a lost case.
If this one did happen the way you want him,
I'm sure you would keep him in the highest level of pleasantness and well-being,
and that is a sure way of ensuring
that who you are finds full expression in your life.
Then when you say
‘I am human,’ you’ll refer to… refer to the immensity of being human,
not to the limitations of being human.
Suppose you're here, but you don't have a body
Whether the satsang is two hours or two Millennia would it matter to you?
Only because you have a body two hours
If you did not have a body these were two thousand years. What's the problem?
So only because of a physicality time exists isn't it?
Only because you have a physical structure
time exists in your experience if there is no physical body
What is time to you?
The same goes with space also if you had no body what size dress would you need?
-
only because there's a body "space". Isn't it?
If you did not have a body
How many people could we have for Satsang in this hall?
Is there a limit. I'm asking. no
So only because you are identified with your physical nature
Time and space is a reality for you otherwise both wouldn't exist
So is it a concept it is not a concept it is a reality of existence
Can we experience it?
Anything that's real can be experienced
even Falsehood can be experienced you notice
It happening
In so many ways it's happening isn't it things which are not true are true in your mind.
Is a classic example in the yogic listing in the yoga Sutras himself Patanjali himself uses the example
Suppose we take a rope and throw it on you and say snake
Suddenly
Everything that would happen to you if a snake had landed upon you will happen to you though It is just an inanimate rope
You may even die of a heart attack?
Yes
Even Falsehood that which does not exist you can experience such is the beauty of creation
Even that which does not exist. You can experience
Why would you be denied the ability to experience that which does exist?
You definitely can it is just that you have to disengage a little bit from your personal entertainment
that is
That which does not exist it dominating right now
Things that don't exist in the universe are happening in your mind, and they're going about as if it's a reality
It's just badly made movies are going on. That's all
What's happening in your mind is just bad cinema isn't it not well directed
So because of your engagement with that
You this question comes up can we experience reality?
Reality the only thing you can experience isn't it?
but
Creation is so generous it is willing to allow you to experience even that which does not exist
fantastic, isn't it?
you
people always kept account of money and things that they have
but very few people kept kept [account] of
How they are are [there] progressing or regressing or what is happening people have taken on this mode
If small things go wrong in their life
They'll find one little person down there, and say it's because of him. I'm talking about the husband
If big things go wrong, it's because of him
the big guy up there
this guy
never in account
The little people or big people
this one
This one acts really big when he has to receive something, but when he has to give something he really acts very small
people taken out the smoke
this is because there is [no] clear accounting process and
No [clear-cut] balance sheet this is where I stand in my life
if there was an accounting process
if you
Shall we make an audit?
Little bit of Life audit, when you are five years of age
How joyful you were!
Today, how joyful you are? the balance sheet, is it profit or loss?
that means it's loss.
I was speaking to a group of people at the Princeton university,
and I looked around
a whole lot of people sitting with long faces
particularly in a university, the faces are extra long
Maybe it's the weight of knowledge. I don't know
So I looked around except for three four faces which were young, faces which were bright all others
Then I asked them what's happened to all these people over thirty years of age. Why are they carrying such long faces?
One lady stands up and says. They are all married
this has happened only because there is no day-To-day accounting every day before you go to bed if you had a
Balance sheet going today, [am] I little better human being [why] my little worse?
every day
if you had accounts
once a year if there were the clear audit
external audit
Then very quickly you would have recovered
but after 25 years one day you realize
You are deep in the red
Now [very] difficult to recover because it's gone to another place
where to a point where a whole lot of people have an argument that
it is not practical to be joyful in the accounting job a
Whole lot of people are actually arguing that it's not practical to be joyful
You you met a lot of them
yes or no?
People are making [an] case that it is not practical to be joyful
Is it practical?
to be in various states of stress and distress and
Still function properly in the world
if one has to function in variety of atmospheres in variety of situations
variety of Challenges on day to day basis
One fundamental thing is this must be a peaceful and joyful being isn't it
Otherwise, how is it practical?
that a
person Under Great Stress Or distress
Can function effectively in any field or any area of life?
you
[Questioner] You talk about devotion being the sweetest way to live
but you also talk about how nature doesn't reveal itself easily.
[Sadhguru] What is this? Nature....?
[Participant] ...does not reveal itself easily. It takes heart-breaking sadhana to realize the truth.
So my question is, is devotion enough?
[Sadhguru] Are you asking this question as a woman or a banker?
[Participant] As a woman.
[Sadhguru] If you are woman, devotion is enough. If you are a banker,
we need to do head-breaking, heart-breaking sadhana.
I want you to understand how difficult the spiritual process is going to be for you,
is determined by you not by nature and not by your guru.
The nature or the Existence or the Creator and your guru are seeing how to make it
as easy as possible, as simple as possible, as quick as possible.
Because if you take time, it's not a question of your life going waste,
it's a question of my life going waste.
If you don't make it, it's not a question of you failing, it's a question of me failing.
You see, I don't like to lose. You can see that? I don't like to be on the losing side.
You can see that. You must see how I drive on the street, I don't like to be on the losing side.
If you are here as a woman, it's very simple.
But you are so many other things. Foreign banks are difficult to handle.
Because there are hidden clauses. In every agreement we sign, there is a hidden clause.
It's printed in micro print that it takes a lifetime to read them.
So most people sign them without reading them. So wipe out all the hidden clauses.
Just be here as a woman, very simple.
If you are here just as a man or just as a woman, that's it, it takes.
It doesn't take all this talking and nonsense and rubbish. If I just do this, you should just be there.
So devotion is another dimension of intelligence which unfortunately today's world has lost out on.
Now that little boy who is playing violin, he is just sixteen years of age.
He is not very far between the genius......he is not very far behind the genius of his father.
He is pretty right there. It just takes......it's going to take very little time for the boy to catch up.
That has come not because of training. That's come because of simple devotion.
You see how he sits? See how he sits next to his father, with great amount of love and devotion.
You look at his eyes, he looks at his father with that kind of love and devotion.
In that, learning happens in a completely different way.
There is a very..., there was a fabulous saint.
In Andhra Pradesh, there is no home in Andhra Pradesh who will not have at least a little book about this saint.
His name was Vemanna. His name was something else, they called him Vemanna.
So his name is Vemanna. So he was with his guru and this boy is little dim.
He is a dim companion. He is such a simpleton, can't get anything straight.
I have lot of them like that and they are doing great. They can pull off anything.
It is the intelligent one, it's people who think they are intellectually smart who are getting all tangled up in Isha.
Simpletons are doing great. Somebody else may think he is nothing.
But just see the result he is creating, it's fantastic.
So this is a simpleton. Everybody......he's butt of everybody's jokes.
One day......But the guru takes kindly to this boy because he is not smart like others.
So one day guru has an important function or an event to go to. So he goes to the river for bath.
And his clothes folded, he tells the boy, 'You hold the clothes in your hand. Stand here.
Don't keep it down because the ground is wet and it'll get soiled. Don't keep it down. Just hold it, that's all.'
So the guru went in to take his ritual dip and wash himself and when he came out the boy had kept it down.
The clothes were soiled. And he kept it down because when the guru looked like this,
he thought he needs something and he kept it down and ran to the guru.
He is simple. One thing at a time, he cannot handle two things at a time.
Because these are two things, clothes and guru. Two is complicated.
And the guru looked at this. Now he has to go somewhere. His clothes are soiled.
And he told him repeatedly 'Don't keep it down, don't keep it down' and he keeps it down.
So he gave him a little chalk and he told him, 'You fool, there's nothing else you can do.
Sit here and write just 'Rama, Rama, Rama' on this rock, nothing else.
You can't do anything better. Just do this. Hope grace will descend on you.
Just sit here and write 'Rama, Rama, Rama,' just over and over again on the same place.'
The boy felt so ashamed, so pained because he let down his guru. He told him so many times but somehow he cannot get it.
So he started writing. The guru left in a rush.
After the whole day, some event, he came back in the evening and first thing is he asked for this boy,
'Where is he?' Because he was feeling bad for the harshness with which he spoke to him.
He was nowhere to be seen. 'Oh, then I told him to write 'Rama' and we did not give the next instruction.
Maybe he is still there.' And he went. The boy was still writing 'Rama.'
The chalk had worn out long time ago. His forefinger and thumb had worn out right up till here,
and he was still writing 'Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama.'
The guru just took him and embraced him and this boy --
I don't know how many, somebody who is knowledgeable about this should say --
he wrote hundreds of fabulous poems which is even today, after a few hundred years,
even today there is no Telugu speaking home where there'll be no book on Vemanna's poems.
Almost every home will have it. Anybody who can read and write, in their home there will be.
And just about everybody is conversant with these poems. Brilliant poetry he just poured out, out of his devotion.
So, that's what devotion can do because devotion is another dimension of intelligence.
Devotion is the intelligence, you understand as a bigger intelligence and you have learnt to keep your little intellect aside.
That is devotion. Devotion does not mean everyday doing pooja, doing this, doing that.
Devotion simply means your involvement with life is so absolute that even you don't matter anymore.
Your involvement with what you have taken up is so absolute that who you are does not matter.
Then you are a devotee. Devotion means you are devoid of yourself, that's devotion.
(Sadhguru): Sixteen years ago on this day
we
concluded the
90-day Wholeness Program in this place,
on 13th September I think. (Laughs)
So
when I suddenly remembered this in the afternoon,
I was itching to do something.
(Laughs)
So
when we were doing the Wholeness Program
with those 60 and odd people,
very hardy ones because there was no place to live;
a hut was, that was threatening to fall down any time,
repeatedly threatening us that
it's going to come down upon us,
but still we did all that we had to do there.
And at that time
everybody dreamt we must build a meditation hall.
It took
maybe another six years or seven years before we built the Spanda Hall.
Today it is such that the Spanda Hall is occupied almost ... 20 to 25 days in a month
and it's not available for anybody in the ashram,
and Sadhana Hall is anyway bursting at the seams.
So
today we started the project called '
Adi Yogi Alayam',
a south-facing
(Applause)
a meditation hall which is south-facing
because Adi Yogi
when he sat as a guru
he sat south facing.
So this meditation hall is south facing.
And
we will have a wonderful consecration which will befit Him for this hall.
So
You like the name Adi Yogi Alayam?
I've been thinking
we have to have something in his name,
because
this
this fundamental possibility
has evolved from this one idea
that he put in those seven people's minds.
He made them thirst for something
beyond the limitations of their existence.
He put this hunger into their stomach,
he put this hunger into their hearts,
that they want to be something more
than what we normally know as a human being.
Every creature has come with a framework.
An ant can do certain things;
I'm sure there are some champion ants
which can do little more,
but within that framework.
A tiger can do something but within that framework.
An elephant can do something but within that framework.
A human being can do something within that framework;
a certain dimension of whatever.
He put this idea that you don't have to limit yourself to your dimension,
you can transcend this,
there is another way to be,
a completely different way to be.
This idea
he not only gave the idea and the thought,
he also gave a method
to go there
It is that... this one idea
that a human being can strive to evolve beyond
the dimension of his present existence,
which is the basis of this whole civilization and culture.
It does not matter whether somebody calls himself
a Hindu or a Buddhist or a Jain or a Sikh or whatever,
all of them are striving for this one idea that
they want to cross these limitations and attain to liberation.
The idea of mukthi,
the whole culture is
the centerpiece is mukthi,
Please see.
Everything that we''re doing here in this culture is
essentially towards that,
that there is a possibility of transcending all limitations and getting there.
There has never been a more revolutionary idea
on this planet.
Since his time,
nobody has come up with a more revolutionary idea than this,
that you can transcend the very limitation
the very dimension in which you exist.
When I was in United States somebody asked me,
'Who
Who is one person in the western world
who has played a big role in,
you know, evolving human consciousness?'
Without a moment's doubt I said, 'Charles Darwin.'
They said, 'Charles Darwin?
He's only a naturalist.'
I said, 'For the Western world,
he is the one who gave the idea that you can evolve,'
So Charles Darwin, though in no way was he spiritual,
he saw this thing in nature that everything is evolving --
a single-celled animal is becoming a multi-celled animal,
a multi-celled animal is becoming more complex and more complex,
from one dimension to another,
life is evolving.
'So there is a possibility for a human being also to evolve
beyond his present limitations' is a natural progression of Theory of Evolution.
for one to go beyond his limitations,
even to strive,
the compulsion should go,
the compulsiveness should go.
This compulsiveness,
one dimension,
one fundamental dimension of compulsives is your own prarabdha.
Prarabdha is the allotted karma
and it is like a coiled spring, it wants to find expression;
it will not spare anybody.
So the best thing is to exhaust the prarabdha
as quickly as possible with immense activity,
so that if you sit , there is nothing compulsive in you
, if you sit here you just sit here, that's all.

(Kiran bedi) : Sadhguru, we said
we just talked about Vande Mataram.
Why do we call our country Mataram
why not Patram …pita
why Mataram?
Why is it motherland,
why not fatherland,
why not both?
Sadhguru: Because though essentially a nation is the people
but the boundaries and the definition of a nation comes from a land.
A land or earth
we’ve always seen it as mother
because if we sow a seed, life comes back at us.
So we see it as a woman.
So almost everywhere except in certain very martial cultures,
always nation has been seen as a woman or a mother
because it's a definition of a defined aspect of geography
which makes a nation in a certain sense.
Kiran Bedi: Yes.
Is that the only reason?
When did it begin?
Sadhguru: I would say it began with this nation
because this is the oldest nation on the planet.
It defies what people think is a nation today.
The modern nations are made
people are making nations based on language, religion, race, ethnicity,
maybe little bit of ideology,
one or two
essentially it is the sameness of people which makes a nation.
But we as we have known this nation for over eight – ten thousand years as Bharatvarsh –
we have never defiled ourselves with sameness.
If you drive fifty kilometers,
people look different,
wear differently,
eat differently,
speak different languages,
everything is different.
So what makes this one nation?
When the Europeans came here
they …they went about saying
“This country that we have heard about,
it doesn’t exist
because there is nothing binding this,
how can they say this is the nation?”
But for over eight – ten thousand years
within this subcontinent
and also in the remaining part of the known world of those days,
everywhere people referred to this as one nation
though at some points we were over two hundred political entities.
So what is it that makes this nation?
This is something that leadership in this country
and the people of this country must really look at.
It is not language, it is not religion, it is not race
because this nationhood predates all religion.
When there was no religion there was this nation.
We called this Hindustan.
It did not mean representing a particular group of people who belong to a certain religion,
it is only a geographical description.
The land between Himalayas and the Indu Sarovar is Hindustan.
It does not represent a particular religion.
We never had a religion,
we still don’t have,
we’re struggling to compete with others (Laughs)
but we still don’t have
because this is not a religious identity,
this is a geographical and cultural identity.
But what kept us together for so long?
No nation on the planet has stayed together for so long.
It is essentially – if you look at it
we have always been a land of seekers
versus
people be when we look for sameness
we try to become land…land of believers.
People believe in one thing, so they come together.
Here we’ve been always a land of seekers,
seekers of truth and liberation.
In this seeking we found oneness
because this seeking is not something that you invented,
this is the nature of human intelligence.
The nature of human intelligence will naturally want to know,
realize and liberate itself.
So this nation was built on that fundamental –
you cannot even say it's built,
at the same time it's been managed on that fundamental that you are seekers.
When you are a seeker you are not aligned to any one particular thing.
It is just that you are aligned to the life process within you
and that never goes wrong.
Always, every life, it doesn’t matter how badly you contaminate them with belief systems,
with you know brainwashing
and whatever you do
still an individual once his survival is taken care of,
he seeks to know… he wants to know what is the nature of his existence,
what is everything around him.
Whether you call it science or spiritual process or enquiry or quest,
it doesn’t matter what you call it,
essentially human intelligence wants to know
wants to transcend its present limitations,
wants to liberate itself from the fetters in which we’re existing right now.
So we built a nation on this longing, this seeking
and it cannot be destroyed as long as we keep this seeking alive.
If we do not transform ourselves towards sameness,
we will always be one.
If you try to transform yourself towards belief and sameness,
we will not be one.
Kiran Bedi: Then was that Bharata?
Is India different?
Has India changed and changed the Bharata, was that Bharata?
Sadhguru: Bharat.
Kiran Bedi: Bharat.
Sadhguru: Bharat means – bha – ra – ta.
Bhava means sensation
because your whole experience of life is sensory right now.
What you see,
what you hear,
what you smell,
what you taste,
what you touch are different types of sensations.
So sensation is the basis of your experience right now.
This is the fundamental of your experience.
Bha means sensation out of which comes emotion.
Ra…ra means raga or the tune.
The tune is not yours,
the existence has already set the tune,
you cannot set the tune.
Now you have to just find the rhythm which is the thala.
If you find the right rhythm you are a fantastic human being,
if you miss the rhythm you’re crushed by the process of life.
So we called this nation Bha-ra-ta
and the first - or not necessarily - the first
one of the great kings of the past was Bharata.
People say the country is named after him,
no,
he is named after the country.
There are so many Bharats and Bharatis in this country.
Their country is not named after them,
they are named after this nationhood.
Kiran Bedi: Did we make a mistake then
in converting our name from Bharat to India?
Sadhguru: A serious mistake.
Because… you need to understand this
whenever somebody occupies a nation
any conquering forces when they take over certain nations,
first thing they will do is they’ll change your name.
This is the technology of dominance,
this is the technology of enslaving.
You must see –
if you look at the African-American history
when African people were brought in, the first thing is at the port
their names were changed –
whatever they had African names they were taken away
and some silly names will be given.
That’s what has been done to us.
Thiruvananthapuram is Trivandrum, okay.
Chennai is Mad-ras (Laughs) -
we don't know whether we are mad or we’re rascals (Laughter).
Like this –
“India”.
What does that mean?
It doesn’t mean anything.
So if I give you a meaningless name,
you will become a meaningless stupid person in front of me
because I have a meaningful name, I have a tradition, I have a culture – you have nothing.
So in that context we have become India.
This is the first thing because the concept of a nation must sink into everybody’s mind
because nation is just an idea.
When this idea burns through your
burns through your mind and sinks into your heart and your passion is risen towards that,
then you have a real nation,
otherwise nation is just in the paper.
This is the unfortunate reality for us right now.
So at least when they left in 1947
the first thing we should have done is
change the name in such a way that it resonates in some way in everybody’s mind.
Now you… you’re using an English name for an Indian nation.
Hardly two, three percent of us can speak English language in this country properly, okay?
The remaining people are essentially left out.
I think this is one thing I would like to request the present Prime Minister –
we must rename this country in a way it reverberates in everybody’s hearts.
(Thumping his heart?)
Kiran Bedi: Wow, wow, wow (Applause).
Sadhguru: – I know a whole lot of intellectual crowd will say
“What is in a name?”
Okay call yourself Tobu, (Laughter)
call yourself Momo (Laughter) -
people are doing that.
I am not saying…I am not against anything,
all I am saying is when you utter your name
you must understand there is sound,
whatever we utter is only a sound.
The meaning is only a psychological thing,
a social thing.
right now if I say “Kiran,” it's only a sound,
the meaning is psychological and social –
leave the meaning of it,
the sound is existential and it has a power.
Bharat has power,
this power has to reverberate through everybody’s hearts in this country.
And the idea of what it means to be an Indian,
the fundamental concept –
five things you must know about being an Indian.
This must get across to every human being.
Because
if every human being who live this
lives in this country,
if his aspirations are not the same as the national aspiration,
then you don’t have a nation,
you just have names.
It is… it is not just that the name will do everything.
Name has to inspire passion in people, for the nation.
Right now they have only hormonal passions going,
there’s no passion for the nation, okay?
So that is why what is happening to the women is happening.
So, it is not that a name is a solution for everything
but nationhood,
why a nationhood is important is –
“Why can't we think about the whole world?”
We can,
but nationhood is the largest piece of humanity that you can be committed to right now.
That’s why a nation is important.
When we say “You are committed to this nation and its well-being”
that means at least if not 7.2 billion people
at least you’re committed to 1.2 billion… 1.25 billion people
which is a great step from being committed to your own personal well-being.
So in that sense nature
nation is important.
As a spiritual being for me –
I am not a nationalistic person that way,
I would like to look at every human being and every creature on this planet the same way.
That’s how I am.
But nation is important because the scope of one’s passion,
involvement and concern has expanded
beyond likes and dislikes of two people sitting here.
Kiran Bedi: I think with the return as we notice
return of Hindi much more,
in the last ten days Hindi has returned much more.
We might hear Bharatvasi much more,
Bharatiya much more.
Sadhguru: You are leaving us out, we are from the south.
Kiran Bedi: Then you learn a little bit of Hindi then.
Sadhguru: No, we won't (Laughs).
Kiran Bedi: You won't?
Sadhguru: No.
Kiran Bedi: Why?
Sadhguru: That is why I am telling you,
it is not the sameness which binds us.
We are different people, but we are fine together.
That is the nation… that is the nature of this country.
That is what has to be encouraged.
You don’t try to teach everybody Hindi.
You don’t try to teach everybody Tamil.
I speak Tamil, you speak this thing, you eat paratha, I eat idli,
I think that’s the best thing, you think that’s the best thing –
it doesn’t matter, but we have no issues.
In the same family you can wo
five people are there,
they worship even five different gods
but no problem. In the same room.
Kiran Bedi: I don’t see an imposition,
I see more of promotion. That’s what I feel.
Sadhguru: That will happen anyway.
(Kiran bedi): We are in a cusp,
we are in a position today,
we’ve got a decisive mandate.
I’m not being political but that’s a political reality today.
We have a decisive mandate today.
Where does this mandate begin from and where do we all fall in?
Where do we fall in place?
Because you being
This is being webcast and millions of people are watching you all over the world, as Indians
I think you got two responsibilities –
one is a people’s responsibility
Sadhguru: I’ve decided, from now on I will not use the word “Indian”.
Kiran Bedi: Why?
Sadhguru: I would like to use the word Bharat. (Applause)
Kiran Bedi: I told you!
Hindi is coming in. That’s the Hindi name of India anyway.
Sadhguru: No, it is a
Kiran Bedi: Hindustan. We also call it Hindustan.
Sadhguru: Yes, actually Hindustan describes the geography,
Bharat describes the culture.
I think a time has come where (Applause)
where our identity has to be cultural.
Because culture is inclusive.
This is something we must understand.
When his seven sages who are now considered the celebrated saptarishis of this country
you must understand this first of all
the greatness of this nation is in pursuit and accomplishment of spiritual dimensions.
It is this spiritual thread which is holding the country together –
this longing to know.
If you hack it, then you’ll… you cannot maintain the sovereign of this country, believe me.
Kiran Bedi: Is it religion?
Sadhguru: It is not religion.
Kiran Bedi: No?
Sadhguru: No, I am telling you the nationhood,
what we call as Bharat predates all religion.
So when Adiyogi was asked by these seven sages,
“How many ways can we attain?”
He said “If you use your physical body as a foundation,
there are hundred and twelve ways of realizing the divine.
But if you transcend the physical body,
then as many atoms there are in the universe, that many doorways are there.
Do you call this a religion?
Kiran Bedi: No
Sadhguru: Religion means that you believe “This is it.”
And unfortunately religious teachings
a whole lot of religious teachings do not believe in nationhood.
They do not believe in the fundamental existence of a nation.
Now this is not about going with somebody, for somebody, no.
First of all we must decide –
are we a nation?
If we are,
the idea of nation should
should be burnt into everybody’s head.
Kiran Bedi: How? Where do we begin from?
Sadhguru: Schooling, of course.
Kiran Bedi: With the teachers with no general knowledge? (Laughter)
Sadhguru: You can train them in a summer.
Kiran Bedi: Who trains them?
Sadhguru: This is what needs determination in the leadership.
That is what I am saying.
What is this country…?
See, I must tell you this.
The United States of America,
in the twenties particularly when a whole lot of Italians and others,
particularly Italians
a lot of them moving to United States,
now they speak their own language,
they eat their own food,
they are among themselves,
they will not mix with the so called American thing
because their culture they think is richer, they’re
they’re somewhat you know like exuberant population like India at that time,
so they won’t mix.
So the US government did something which is amazing
which today I’m sure a whole lot of intellectuals will brand this as fascist
but they’ll all queuing up to go to United States of course –
US government made posters.
For Germans one kind of posters,
for Italians one kind of posters,
Jewish people another kind of posters.
Within the kitchen of every home they must fix this poster, okay?
It’s a government released poster
where an Italian housewife –
how she should serve an American breakfast every day in the morning.
How she should be dressed,
how the table should be set,
what should be for breakfast.
For lunch, dinner you can eat Italian
but breakfast should be American.
You understand?
Kiran Bedi: Wow.
Sadhguru: I’m saying this may sound fascist
Kiran Bedi: Yes
Sadhguru: …but it is with this they integrated different ways
I’m saying even something so small as what you are eating for breakfast,
the government is looking at it because they are interested in making a nation.
Kiran Bedi: Wow.
Sadhguru: I was amazed.
I saw…that poster is still with me somewhere.
I was amazed to see that somebody went into such elaborateness
of putting people together.
If you had left them like that
they would all be separate separate nations within a nation and fighting with each other.
Whatever said and done,
America is such a melting pot but one nation, you know.
Sadhguru: If your mind or your intelligence does not get entangled
with any identity including your body,
including your own thought process,
including your own emotion,
spiritual process is very natural.
If your intelligence is not entangled with anything,
it's very natural for your intelligence
to enquire and open up different dimensions of life
You identify yourself with something
in search of security,
in search of safety,
in search of self preservation,
otherwise it's not doing anything else,
please see.
It gives you some sense of… false sense of belonging,
which you will anyway shed some day.
The moment you are identified with something that you are not,
your intelligence is freaked.
It will go in cycles around that.
Whatever you are identified with
your intelligence functions only around that, please see.
Yes?
If you identify yourself with your religion,
your nationality,
your family it works only around that.
It's a certain type of prejudice, isn't it?
A prejudiced mind cannot see;
a prejudiced mind cannot reveal the reality of life,
that's all it is.
When I say prejudiced,
it's on many different levels.
‘No, no, I am very broad minded, I am not prejudiced.’
Well, you have a broad prejudice,
you know.
Your mind is functioning with a certain identity.
Once there is an identity it is prejudiced.
On a certain day a man died
and he went to heaven.
There, God himself opened the gates of heaven,
welcomed him
and God said,
‘See I have a few chores to finish and come;
if you could just mind the gate for me for a few minutes,
I’ll just come back.’
He felt really great;
you know substituting for God.
That’s nice.
Substituting for God,
filling in for God is not a small honor, isn't it?
Keeping the gates,
but it's okay you are doing God’s job.
He was waiting for something to happen
and to his distress and amazement
his wife appeared at the gates.
He said,
‘What, what, what are you doing here.
This is not a local bar or something.
How did you follow me?’
She said,
‘Well, I was just driving back from the funeral;
I crashed the car and here I am.’
Then
when he entered,
God had put a test for him.
When he came to the gates,
God had asked him,
‘See, my son, you have come here that’s fine,
but you have to spell a word
if you have to enter the heaven.’
So he had thought,
‘Oh my God!
Is this old man a school teacher?
He is asking for a spelling.
Is there’s a
Is there a damn spelling test even here?’
He said
The God said,
‘Don’t you worry; it's a simple word.’
‘What's the word, Father?’
God said, ‘You have to spell the word, love.’
So then he thought
luL-U, … lL… you know,
he had told many people
‘I love you,’
but he had never written a letter.
So he thought luL-U… lvL-V… loL-O… love
L-O-V-E?
God said, ‘You passed; come in.’
‘Okay, somehow I got in.’
Now when his wife came
he said, ‘Okay, you have come here,
but unless you spell a word you can't get in.’
She said, ‘Oh, come on!
If you can spell the damn word and get in,
can't I do it?
Tell me what's the damn word.’
He looked at her and said,
‘Czechoslovakia.’
Mind is a very prejudiced thing.
It all depends what you are identified with, you know.
Whatever you are identified with,
your mind rotates around that.
Right now you are identified with many things
that you are not,
many.
For example,
if I say
I am speaking;
as I am speaking
suddenly if I pick this glass and say,
This is my glass’
you will think
okay Sadhguru has some problem,
but it's alright everybody says he is wise;
let's listen.
After sometime I say,
This is me,’
then you say,
‘Let's go, enough!
This is too much!’
Please see this is what has happened to you.
For example,
there are many ways to look at this.
For example -
food appears on your plate.
You say, ‘this is my food;’
you eat it and then you say, ‘This is me.’
Isn't it so?
What you call as ‘my body’
is just a heap of food or no?
Yes?
It’s the food that you have eaten, isn't it?
What you accumulate can be yours;
I will not dispute it for now,
but it can never be you.
Isn’t it so?
Yes?
Whatever you accumulate, it can be yours
but can… but it can never become you, isn't it?
Did you accumulate your body over a period of time?
Yes or no?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Did you accumulate your mind over a period of time?
Yes?
But both these things right now you call as myself, isn't it?
And it doesn’t stop there.
It just extends into many things -
your home,
your car,
your things,
your money,
your children,
your husband,
your wife,
a million other things;
your religion,
your ideas,
your ideologies,
everything.
You are identified with too many things which you are not.
Once you are like this, your intelligence is freaked.
It's a wonky intelligence; ,
it's lost its penetration.
It simply repeats old nonsense.
You’ve heard of Tenali Ramakrishna?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Oh! Tenali Rama was just jester in Krishnadevaraya’s
court
Similar things happened also with Akbar and Birbal,
but we will stick to the South Indian story.
It so happened
when Krishnadevaraya was young,
because of some political reasons
his mother had to leave a few month old Krishnadevaraya
with another woman for care and go somewhere.
For more than 18 months
the child was separated from the mother,
but he was under the care of another woman
who also had a child
who was a few months older than Krishnadevaraya.
So this woman nursed Krishnadevaraya as her own child.
She breastfed him and he grew up.
Later on his mother came back,
took him and then he became a great emperor.
So this boy who was that woman’s son
Krishnadevaraya always treated him as a brother,
as an elder brother
because
‘we We drank milk from the same mother,
so we are brothers,’
that’s how he considered this.
So as… as an expression of his gratitude,
he gave away a few villages to this boy
and he said,
‘Okay, you make your own kingdom.’
This village bumpkin got these few things
and within a few years he squandered everything
and lost everything
and again back to the square one.
Krishnadevaraya went on to become a great emperor.
Then one day, this man who was over 30 years of age at that time thought,
‘my younger brother has become a great emperor
and I am with nothing;
let me go there and see if I could get something out of this,’
and he went.
Krishnadevaraya welcomed him as
as you would welcome a elder brother;
he gave him all the necessary honors,
all the necessary hospitality
and gave him a place in the court.
He just looked at this;
Krishnadevaraya had gathered a scintillating array of talent in his court.
He looked at all this
all kinds of debates going on,
concerts going on, on a daily basis;
he was just amazed
and above all
this Tenali Rama such a brilliant assistant.
Then he lamented with Krishnadevaraya,
‘You are so successful,
you have become a great emperor
because you have such intelligent people around you.
If only I had people like you around me,
I would also become a great emperor.
Particularly this Tenali Rama,
if I had someone like him with me,
I would also become a great emperor.’
So Krishnadevaraya felt bad about this
and he asked,
‘What shall I do, my brother?’
He said,
‘If you can give this Tenali Rama to me,
I will go and build a great empire of my own.’
So immediately Krishnadevaraya called Tenali Rama
and ordered,
‘You must go with my elder brother; he wants you.’
So Tenali Rama said,
‘Oh your elder brother wants me, why?
I can send my elder brother with him.’
That looked like a good idea for Krishnadevaraya,
because he is not eager to lose Tenali Rama
but at the same time his elder brother is asking.
He doesn’t know what to do.
‘Oh, you really have an elder brother,
I did not know?
No, I have a elder brother.
Let us send my elder brother with your elder brother.’
So they went and asked this man,
‘So, Tenali Rama’s elder brother is willing to come with you, is that okay?’
So this fool thought,
‘If Tenali Rama is so intelligent,
his elder brother…’
He said, ‘Fine.’
Next day he is to leave
and a huge send-off has been organized.
So in the full assembly of the court,
everybody has assembled
and Tenali Rama came with a bull on the rope.
He walked into the court.
Krishnadevaraya saw this and asked,
‘What is this, why have you brought this bull into the court?’
No my lord, this is my elder brother.’
He said, ‘What nonsense!
What is this you are trying to do?’
No, we drank milk from the same mother.’
Once you get identified with something that you are not,
your intelligence is no good.
It just becomes repetitive.
So this repetitive intelligence is what we are referring to as karma.
When we say
when we see somebody going through certain patterns
irrespective of the situations in which they exist -
sun came up wonderfully today morning,
but somebody is miserable, hum,
flowers are blossoming,
weather is good,
everything is great,
but somebody is miserable,
then we say, ‘Oh, this is his karma.’
Why we are saying this is - this is his own doing,
because he has set up patterns
which are just repetitive.
He is not able to enjoy the sunrise;
he is not able to enjoy the beautiful breeze;
he is not able to enjoy the fragrance of the flowers;
his karma is going on.
What is going on in his head is what rules him.
This is his karma.
Karma means action -
your action or in other words,
your experience of life is 100% your doing;
nobody else’s doing.
I Know the Eastern minds have also absorbed this in a horribly
distorted way
but
right now if you told your friend or your relative, I'm going to the Ashram for three days.
They would become very kind towards you and ask why what went wrong?
Something must be wrong with your life. You're going to the Ashram to heal a wound - to solace yourself
Something must be really wrong with your life or you must be too old for life.
Otherwise why would you go to an Ashram? So this has crept into this culture also
Essentially
if you're alive only in parts or if you are partially alive
to be partially alive-  to be partially alive is a terrible torture.
Many of you have been through this science classes. I'm sure you open up frogs and cockroaches. Did you?
There were nice lively beings, but you open them up because you wanted to find their heart and liver and kidney.
Half alive... being half alive is torture. Have you seen this?
Always being half alive is torture
This is the torture that a large segment of humanity is going through right now because they're half alive.
Only one part of them has become alive, only their physicality
and mentality has become alive the rest of it is yet to become alive.
Half alive people will suffer everything.
They will suffer ignorance, they will suffer education.
They will suffer poverty, they will suffer affluence.
They will suffer being alone, they will suffer being in a relationship.
If they are not married they suffer, if they married they ...
If they don't have children they suffer that as if children if they are there they can come and bite you, they do.
No children, what are you suffering, but that also they suffer?
Just show me one thing that human beings are not suffering right now, just show me one aspect of life
that human beings are not suffering right now.
They're suffering just about anything.
Not just life. They're even suffering death before it happens.
He's thinking of a building a pyramid for himself.
That which is and that which is not everything they suffer.
This is not you are not suffering loneliness,
you are not suffering company, you are not suffering money,
you are not suffering poverty what you're suffering is you are half alive.
You are desperately trying to make yourself fully alive through money, through drink, through sex, through
going on a trek, coming to the ashram.
In so many ways you're somehow trying to make yourself fully alive
which is yet to happen fully, here and there you feel a burst of aliveness but again it ebbs down.
So when people are constantly half alive pleasure
becomes an important part of your life, very important part of your life, without it you cannot exist.
Pleasure becomes paramount in your life, when you're only half alive, when physicality is all that you know
pleasure becomes a immense importance in your life.
If you become fully alive, you will become so blissful, joyful
ecstatic without reason, bursts of ecstasy with- within you without any reason, it's almost embarrassing.
Now the thought of pleasure just evaporates.
Looking for a drink, looking for some kind of pleasurable thing just evaporates out of your mind
because you're fully alive.
When you're fully alive pleasure disappears when you're half dead pleasure is an important important thing.
Sadhguru: These questions and these thoughts are coming
from a mindset
which has grown in organized religions.
We are not talking about Shiva versus somebody else
because that you refer to as Shiva
includes all these things that you are talking about.
Just one little dimension,
this or that they found out
and they started talking about it
and they became popular.
I am not trying to belittle them;
they are all wonderful human beings
who’ve done great service to humanity.
But I am saying in terms of perception,
there hasn’t been another being like him.
And perception is all that I value
and that's all you should value.
Rest can be made up,
rest is just frills.
So you are talking about Zen.
What greater master than of Zen than Shiva himself?
That somebody comes,
his own son,
he doesn’t get the point –
you’ve heard of Gutei,
the Zen Master?
Gutei always did this
He will be talking
people look at it,
‘Okay why he is showing his finger to me?’
The thing is
he is always trying to say everything is one,
this is the teaching.
Rest of what I say is not important,
this is the teaching.
So there was a little boy
because in these Buddhists monasteries,
Zen monasteries little boys become monks,
four, five year olds.
So the little boy who is growing up in the monastery,
he saw Gutei and you know
the boy takes to him.
So this boy is going about
if anybody says anything
So Gutei watched this.
He waited for him to become sixteen.
One day he called the boy and he did this
the boy instinctively
because he has been doing it all over the place,
he also did this.
He took out a knife and chopped off his finger
and they say he attained.
He suddenly saw the point that it's not about one,
it's about nothing.
Shiva went further long time ago.
He came back from somewhere,
he always carried a trishool –
So trishool is a trident.
He is always carrying the trident to show people there are three dimensions –
yourself,
your way of being,
what you know and what you do not know,
and what you do not know rules,
not what you know.
So one day he came back after a long break.
He has not seen this boy, his son.
Now he is ten, eleven years of age.
When Shiva came,
this boy is carrying a little trident,
with that he tries to stop him.
He looked at him and took off his head,
not his trident.
Then whatever drama happened
and then he put another head,
a Gana’s head on top of him
and he became such a brilliant boy.
Even today in India
if people want to start education,
anything
first thing is they will worship this boy
which that Gana has become gaja –
a Gana’s head has become
instead of Ganesha he's become Gajesha now.
They kind of modified it
and made it into an elephant head
but he became the very embodiment of intelligence and brilliance.
They said there was nothing that he did not know.
So that’s the first act of Zen.
So anything
Anything that you can talk of the world,
talk in the world,
nothing is left out of his life.
He is so complex and so complete
and he did not have a teaching,
he only had methods.
That’s the most important thing.
Others have teachings.
How many fingers can you cut?
A method like this,
can you employ?
Can you go about employing this Gutei’s method of cutting a finger?
One boy’s finger you cut and he got it.
If you cut many fingers
you will only have crippled people,
nothing would have happened.
So there is no teaching from Shiva,
only methods
and the methods are one hundred percent scientific in nature.
He gave one hundred and eight ways
and added another six
and said one hundred and twelve ways.
One hundred and twelve ways
because there are one hundred and fourteen chakras in the body,
two of them reside outside the physical body.
He said ‘That realm is only for those who are beyond.’
For human beings there are only one hundred and twelve ways.
And he showed clear methods
as to how you can exploit this one hundred and twelve dimensions
of how this life is made
and each one how you can,
through each one of them you can realize.
There is a beautiful story.
When he was expounding the mechanics of life
with the seven sages,
he had one witness
and she’s, that witness is not like Anantaatheertha,
she is Parvati.
She is already realized.
He taught her or he made her realize in a very intimate manner.
But when the seven sages sat
he went into a completely different dimension of exploration
So it was interesting for her.
Something that happened to her so simply
is such a complex process.
So as he went about expounding different dimensions,
he said,
‘There are hundred and twelve ways
in which a human being can attain.’
She being a woman,
she being realized
and above all she being the wife,
she said, ‘Why only hundred and twelve?
There must be more ways.’
He was looking at the mechanics of life,
exploring things.
He is not giving a teaching,
he is not giving a philosophy.
As he was exploring he saw this as a disturbance,
he waved her aside
‘Tch sit.
There are only one hundred and twelve.’
Because you are going through something
and somebody makes a comment which is a personal comment,
a whimsical comment
he… ‘There are only one hundred and twelve.’
She says, ‘I’ll find more.’
He said, ‘You go and find.’
Then she went.
She is already realized,
she is trying to explore different ways to find it.
After,
they say, many many years of sadhana she came back.
He was still talking to the Saptha Rishis or the seven sages.
She being his wife,
she can come and sit beside him
but she came and sat one step below.
She did not want the sages to know
but she wanted him to know that she has failed.
She just came and sat one step below
to indicate that whatever challenge she threw,
she’s failed.
So she did not want the others to know
but she wanted him to know.
So there are hundred and twelve different ways.
What Shiva is talking is mechanics of life,
no philosophy,
no teaching,
no social relevance,
simply science.
Social relevance,
we add just to make it rounding it off,
otherwise it's too scientific.
From this science,
individual masters make technology out of it.
He did not give technology,
he just gave the science of it.
The technologies that you are enjoying today,
either in the form of a Smartphone or a computer
or some other gadget that you are using,
there is a science behind it.
That science is not relevant to you.
You are only using the technology
but if somebody had not grasped the science
you would not have the technology.
The algorithms that go into the making of
a simple software is very complex.
Sometimes you got your email in a coded form,
did you see?
You can't figure out,
‘Is this what I typed?’
It is all kinds of gibberish
but for somebody else it makes sense.
Because of that it is going.
Now, here we are just using sound waves.
If I speak these amplifiers are just amplifying the sound that I create
and it's travelling as sound-waves.
But suppose I spoke to you on a phone
then what I speak is not going as sound-waves,
it’s becoming electromagnetic waves,
going there and reconverting themselves.
So when it's travelling from here –
you speak on a cell-phone,
it's travelling from here to Bangalore;
it is not going as sound-waves,
it’s become something else.
If you hear that if you can or if you feel that,
it would be something totally different
but some other instrument once again converts it into sound waves
the way you can understand.
So what Shiva said is simply pure science.
He is not talking technology.
He left it to the Saptha Rishis to make the technology
as it would suit the people who would sit in front of him on that day.
Depending upon what kind of gadget we need we produce that
but the fundamental science is the same thing, isn't it?
Nothing has changed about that.
So I am talking about Shiva all the time.
Because it is the science,
the tech is not important;
it's the science which is important.
Tech can be made up,
technology is a made up thing.
Because there is a fundamental science,
using that we are making something out of it.
Gadgets that are relevant today may be irrelevant tomorrow.
Already it's happened, isn't it, so many things?
So many gadgets that we thought were very valuable,
no more valuable
because new gadgets have come
but the same science.
So what kind of gadgets we produce
simply depends upon who is sitting in front of you right now,
what is the need of the hour.
So in this context
there is a very very very big difference
between what you refer to as the Adiyogi
and all the other names that you are mentioning.
They are all technology people;
they grasped one aspect of it
and they made a certain technology for people
who were sitting in front of them at that moment.
It worked for the people
so that's all that matters at that moment.
But we are looking at Adiyogi
as the fundamental science.
It's important at a time like this.
At a time like this
when the humanity is in the kind of state
that it is for various reasons,
it's important the essential science of it is strengthened.
Sadhguru: A thousand years ago,
India contributed to the world
in terms of fifty-three percent of the world’s economy, was India.
Five hundred years ago,
we were about twenty-six percent of the world’s economy.
When the British left us in 1947,
we were 3.6 percent of the world’s economy.
Today, we have risen to six percent
but as a population, we are almost twenty-five percent of the world’s population.
We must at least achieve this twenty-five percent of the world’s economy
in the remaining five to ten years.
If we do not do this,
we will keep our people subjugated forever.
We are at a unique time,
that is, for the first time
for the very first time, we have the necessary tools,
we have resources,
we have the capability
and we have the technology
to address every human problem in this country
and the rest of the world.
This generation has a unique opportunity
that we can move about six hundred million people
from one level of existence
to a completely different level of existence
in an incredibly short time
because we have all the means in place,
the only thing that is missing is
an inclusive consciousness among the people
and this is going to be the fundamental challenge
that we will not identify with little identities that we have around us.
We will not demolish them either
because you cannot demolish that,
but a larger identity of the nation.
The youth of India today has
this tremendous possibility, responsibility and a privilege in front of you
that you could change the way people live in this country.
We have had
a whole lot of people, almost three fourths of this nation’s population
has had such a bad deal.
Such a bad deal
a large part of them are still in a
an extremely bad situation
where about twenty-nine rupees is wealth, per day.
When we’re in such a situation,
we have an opportunity to change this;
we have everything in place,
only you and me have to get into place,
that’s the only thing that’s missing.
To make India once again a glorious nation
when I talk about glory,
I’m not talking about the economic or the military prowess of the nation;
yes, that is also needed (Applause) -
but more than that,
India should embrace the world, like a garland.
India is capable of bringing a new level,
new paradigm of success into the world,
a new paradigm of what it means to be successful
in terms of bringing human well-being.
We have the necessary technologies
and the wisdom to make this happen.
We have to make this world a beautiful place,
not by conquests,
not by capturing
but by captivating the world.
Questioner: I just have one question today.
I believe you’ve talked about expectations
and I feel that sometimes, I tend to be too inclusive in society.
Sadhguru: Oh! What is that too inclusive (Laughter)?
Shivangi: I get over-attached to the people around me and
Sadhguru: No, no, that’s not inclusiveness, that is being exclusive.
See, if I get attached to you only in this whole crowd,
is it being exclusive or inclusive?
Shivangi: Exclusive, Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Yeah. Don’t… Don’t give… wrong labels,
you’re calling exclusiveness as inclusiveness,
that’s trouble (Laughs).
Shivangi: I just want to know,
how do you
how do I make sure that I get rid of the expectations I have
from people and not let whatever their opinions are about me,
get to my head?
Sadhguru: There are two openings which allow things into your head,
these two (Gestures towards the ears) (Laughter).
We can make Isha earplugs, if you want.
I didn’t know there was demand for it.
Our craft department can make Isha earplugs,
very organic,
cotton ones,
wooden ones
or just groundnuts,
two groundnuts (Laughter).
High protein earplugs – we can advertise (Laughter).
Now
what you call as attachment
is a natural consequence of exclusiveness.
The moment you choose between
one and the other,
getting tangled up with it is natural.
See, we’ve already gone through this today –
we accept both filth and fruit
but when it comes to eating,
we choose the fruit.
This is a choice we are making.
When it comes to physical activity,
we choose
but when we just sit here,
where is the need to choose?
For a specific activity,
choices are made
but for the rest of the life,
there is no need to make choices every moment of your life.
Inclusiveness means this –
inclusiveness does not mean you’ve lost your discriminatory sense.
You have your discriminatory sense.
Your discriminatory sense is useful only for performing action,
not for being here.
For being here,
you need not be discriminatory in any way.
To be alive,
if you discriminate,
it will not work
but to act you need discrimination,
otherwise you cannot act sensibly.
So, this problem of getting attached
or overly attached to one
will naturally lead to another consequence of
having deep aversion to many others.
See (Laughs),
to balance your so-called love with one person,
you will have to have deep aversion to a whole lot of people,
you can’t stand them.
Please carefully watch and see,
this is how it’s working.
Whether you are
Maybe those people with whom you have aversion,
you may not notice it
unless they happen to be around you.
Tch, you have aversion
but because they never came near you,
it’s not felt.
But if they happen to come here,
you will feel it
because this balance is always happening.
Now, your expectations about people –
this is not just about people,
there’s everything.
What is the source of all human misery on the planet?
“Life is not happening the way I want
I think it should happen.”
Hmm?
Is there any other cause, I’m asking?
“Life is not happening the way I think it should happen” –
this is the only source of misery in human life, isn’t it?
Tell me (Laughs) –
is it easier to change your thinking or the world (Laughter)?
Participant: Thinking.
Sadhguru: Changing your thinking is very easy, isn’t it?
And first of all,
now, when what you think is so important for you,
have you taken this faculty of thinking into your charge?
No,
you’re in a state of mental diarrhea.
If everything that happens in your thoughts come (comes?) true in your life,
you’re finished (Laughter).
Fortunately, they’re not coming true.
My blessings is may your dreams not come true (Laughter)
because the way you are dreaming,
if all of it happens you’re finished,
because your expectation is coming from a very limited picture of life.
If you want your life to yield in a maximum way –
even in material life, I’m saying,
in a maximum way,
I’m not talking about some spiritual dimension,
just in your material life,
if you want to yield maximum in this world –
no expectations.
You know Shoonya meditation (Laughs)?
No expectations (Laughs).
No expectation does not mean you don’t have a orientation,
it is just that
you don’t… every moment, you don’t go about calculating,
“Oh, I didn’t get what I want,
I didn’t get what I want,
what I want did not happen” –
no.
It’s just that we want to move in this direction,
how far you will go will depend on how much gas you have, isn’t it?
And if you have expectation,
you are wasting all your gas in simply revving up the engine all the time
and you won’t go far.
This whole expectation overtaking you has happened to you
because right from your childhood people are asking,
at the age of three,
people are,
“Tell me, what will you become (Gestures) (Laughter)?
Will you become doctor,
will you become IT engineer” (Laughs)?
Some rubbish
at the age of three.
The expectations that parents have of their children is largely (Laughs)
so unrealistic and stupid most of time,
it is neither good for them nor for the children
and many… right from your early age, you cultivate the same trend.
Let’s do this much with life –
see, all this problem is because
happiness is a tomorrow thing, do you understand?
Why your expectations have such powerful grip on you is –
happiness is a tomorrow thing,
never a today thing (Laughs)
because only if this (Gestures), this (Gestures) and this (Gestures) happens,
I will be happy.
Now as you get more miserable,
as this (Gestures), this (Gestures) and this (Gestures) gets little more away from you every day
instead of coming closer, if it’s going away,
as you get more miserable,
the power of the expectation becomes stronger and stronger.
Right now, let’s say you’re really blissed out
but you want this (Gestures) to happen.
We chased it,
tomorrow instead of being closer,
it’s further away –
it won’t create any great amount of suffering,
it will not.
It will not create any suffering
because you’re joyful.
So, without fixing this (Referring to oneself),
you are trying to do things in the world. Tch,
long time ago it seems Krishna said,
“Yogasthaha kuru karmani” –
that means first establish in yoga,
then act.
But now, you started your action in a mess,
so you come to yoga (Laughter).
So, we are trying to adjust this (Laughs).
You are still a young person,
you do this much –
forget about what you want in the world.
From yourself,
from the people,
from the world,
what you want – drop it.
First establish this,
that what happens within you is determined by you,
nobody else but you.
Just do this one thing,
naturally you will choose to become pleasant.
When you are very pleasant,
still 10,000 things have not happened in my life,
so what (Laughter)?
With a joyful zest, I’ll go after it
and the chances of fulfilling those expectations are far better.
If they don’t happen,
who the hell cares anyway
because my experience of being here is wonderful,
whichever way.
Without fixing the fundamental
we’re trying to run away.
We’ve not fixed this (Referring to oneself)
but we are trying to take this (Referring to oneself) somewhere –
this is trouble.
If you want to drive your car,
you must see first it’s properly fixed.
Two wheels are loose,
it’s on the jack (Laughter),
Now you try to drive,
you know it’s going to be a disaster.
You’re still a young person,
there is no need for anything to happen in your life right now.
This is the time to establish yourself,
this is not a time to drive.
If you drive before you fix the wheels,
it’s going to be painful and disastrous.
Don’t do that to yourself.
Questioner: During the history, people lived to… used to worship the deities like feminine energy
and, but at some point it started to shift to worship the masculine,
not the feminine.
So, what happened?
What was the shift and why?
Sadhguru: It all changed about two thousand years ago.
Forcefully, not by chance.
You’ve heard of over six million women burnt and stake in Europe
over a period of some two hundred years or so.
Little over two hundred years, over six million women were burnt as witches in Europe alone.
Yeah, yeah,
when they gained momentum,
because these are all women who had some capability.
Once they have some capability,
people will gather around them.
Once people gather around somebody and find solutions,
you cannot organize your project. (Laughs)
So, they gave them the most horrible punishment of being burnt alive
so that this will go down,
but still it lived for over two hundred years.
They had to kill a few million to put it down.
So, the feminine expressing anything, phew, it’s gone.
Probably India and a few other Asian countries
are the only countries where still feminine is under worship.
Otherwise,
if you look at the ancient temples in Europe, Arabia, everywhere
they were full of goddess temples.
What is the significance of this?
Is it just about gender business?
No.
It is about viewing life in a more balanced way,
which is most important.
It’s not about man versus woman,
it’s about seeing life more holistically,
not in a skewed way.
it's a terrible history, last sixteen hundred years.
As far as women are concerned,
last sixteen hundred years have been one of the worst times
in the history of humanity for women.
Yes, believe me.
I hope it gets better, the coming year.
And, women are not some strange creatures.
They are our mothers, wives, sisters, daughters, this is what they are.
They are not some strange creatures
(Sadhguru): Whatever you are referring to as meditation
is not an act.
It is a quality.
If you cultivate your body,
your mind,
your emotions
and your energy
to a certain level of maturity
you become meditative.
This is a fragrance
that you will carry about yourself.
(Sadhguru): So even in your mind,
your thoughts, your emotions, your compulsions as to what you like,
what you don’t like,
whom you love, whom you don’t love,
this is all by memory, isn’t it?
It’s already past.
Yesterday you loved somebody,
with that memory you’re living today.
Yesterday you disliked somebody, with that memory you’re living today.
So you’re trying to live that which is over.
If you try to live that which is over,
that which ‘is’ will bypass you.
So yoga means to liberate yourself
from that information which determines who I am right now.
That information which determines the color of my skin,
that information which determines the shape of my body,
that information should not determine how I think,
how I feel, how I experience my life,
but unfortunately it is.
So if you become like this,
that that information does not determine how you are right now,
then you are moving into yoga.
So daily working,
daily morning sadhana is just this
to slowly, gradually,
to create that distance from that information.
You don’t have to lose it.
People say, ‘I want to forget.’
If you forget you will once again do the same idiotic things all over again.
Never ever forget.
The more unpleasant your life has been, the more you should never forget.
If you forget you will do the same stupid things all over again.
This is not about forgetfulness,
but being able to carry.
See suppose today you have memory sticks,
if it’s all the time plugged in and all of it playing,
you’ll go crazy.
You can carry it in your pocket, no problem.
When you want you stick it in your computer, otherwise you put it in your pocket,
this is good, no problem.
Memory is still there
but not compulsively working through you.
When you want, consciously you can activate it; otherwise it lies there.
So if this becomes like this,
if you want you can activate all of it;
otherwise you can keep it aside.
Then once that freedom comes,
memory is not a problem.
But right now memory is a problem
because it’s playing up all the time.
Yesterday’s love,
yesterday’s dislike,
everything is determined who you are today.
It will not allow you to experience what is today,
it will not allow you any possibility of life,
it will just keep on
you’re like a broken record, just going on the same thing.
I dislike this person,
I dislike this person,
I dislike this person.
Only yesterday you disliked him;
today it’s not necessary to dislike him.
Yesterday he was doing something, we disliked him.
There is no need to dislike him today,
but the memory is playing up and saying,
‘I dislike him, I dislike him.’
Whether you like him or dislike him,
both ways it is an old record playing,
which will not allow you any perception.
Unless you begin to perceive life
in larger and larger doses,
there is really no experience of life,
just mind playing over and over,
same record.
So yoga means breaking this cycle
and nature will not release you from that just like that;
it needs a certain amount of work.
If you want to be just like that released,
then you have to release yourself from the body itself.
Staying in the body, which is
the way it is only because of its memory
and not being a part of that memory.
It is the foundations of information that we carry
which has constructed this body the way it is –
to live in it and not to be of it
will not come easy.
I'm not saying it's difficult,
but it needs to be worked at.
The sadhana is just about this.
However simple the sadhana is,
every day if it is worked at,
slowly one can see a certain level of freedom happening within you
step-by-step;
maybe inch-by-inch,
maybe micro-millimeter by micro-millimeter
but nobody can say it is not releasing you.
It will slowly release you.
If you want to go rapidly,
a lot more to do.
You don’t mind going slowly,
something to do.
So tomorrow morning sadhana
The fear is simply because
you are not living with life,
you are living in your mind.
Your fear is always about what’s going to happen next.
That means your fear is always about that which does not exist.
If your fear is about the nonexistent,
your fear is hundred percent imaginary.
If you are suffering the non-existential
we call that insanity.
So people may be in just socially accepted levels of insanity,
but if you’re afraid or
if you’re suffering anything which does not exist,
it amounts to insanity, isn’t it?
People are always suffering either what happened yesterday
or what may happen from tomorrow.
So your suffering is always about that which does not exist,
simply because you’re not rooted in reality,
you’re always rooted in your mind.
Mind is - one part of it is memory,
another part of… is imagination.
Both of them are in oneway imagination,
because both of them don’t exist right now.
You’re lost in your imagination, that’s the basis of your fear.
If you were rooted in reality,
there would be no fear.
[Questioner] Good evening, sir. I happened to listen to a lecture of yours that talked about joy and happiness.
You talked that joy depends on oneself, whereas happiness depends on others.
I tried a little while to practice it but what I found was that I was not able to sustain those small moments of joy.
I could experience joy when I was completely into it, very passionate about what to do,
but somehow when an external person or say, some external entity recognizes what I do,
the joy is just out of my life.
So how do you sustain those moments of joy and not succumb to these pleasures of happiness?
If you could… it would be nice if you can share the difference between
joy and happiness to this crowd too.
[Sadhguru] See, right now if I tell you... or if you're… not me, let’s say your Dean tells you,
from tomorrow, all of you, what kind of clothes you should wear, immediately there’ll be protests in the college.
If your Dean goes further and says, ‘Everybody must eat only four idlis in the morning.’
If your Dean tells you, ‘Everybody should get up at five o’clock in the morning.’
Let’s say he put ten different rules like this, physical things to do,
you will think he's trying to convert you into slaves and you will shout and scream for your freedom, isn't it?
But look at yourself and see. Right now somebody else, if they determine what should
happen around you, you feel like a slave, but right now somebody else is determining
what should happen within you. Is this not slavery?
Somebody can decide whether you're happy or unhappy, is this not slavery?
Somebody can decide whether you will be a pleasant human being
or an unpleasant human being, is this not slavery?
What happens within you, somebody else determines –
this is the worst form of slavery, isn't it?
Isn't it so? It is just that because everybody is like that it seems to be normal; it is not.
It is not normal. Just because everybody is like that, it does not become normal.
This human being, life around you will not happen
will never happen hundred percent the way you want it, and it should not happen;
because if everything happens the way you want it, where do I go?
I'm very happy it's not happening your way.
And now that you're a student? You're still a student?
I believe about sixty, seventy percent is happening your way.
When you get married, the percentage will get reversed.
We don’t know. We don’t know whether which way it'll go.
So if… life around you will never happen hundred percent the way you want it
and it should not. Unless you're living with machines, life will not happen
and even those machines will freak on you, isn't it?
Aren’t the machines troubling you every day for something or the other? They do.
So outside will never happen hundred percent the way you want it
and if your happiness or your joyfulness or let’s not use all these so many words –
essentially it is pleasantness versus unpleasantness.
For pleasantness we have many names, we call it peace, happiness, joy, bliss, ecstasy.
For unpleasantness we have many names – stress, anxiety, fear, tension, whatever else, madness, whatever.
Pleasantness versus unpleasantness –
if your pleasantness is dependent upon what happens around you,
the chances of you being pleasant all the time is remote, isn't it?
In the very nature of things it's not possible.
Only if you're able to create a distance between this and that, it is possible, in the sense.
Whenever things don’t work, there is a habit in lots of people, they will look up, uperwala.
Hmm? Isn’t it? The whole work is looking up.
Looking up. See, you know the planet is round? You know this? Okay.
The planet is round and you're not sitting on top of the North Pole,
you're sitting in Chennai, here in the tropical climate and the damn planet is spinning,
so if you look up you're always looking up in the wrong direction isn't it?
You're invariably looking up in the wrong direction. Isn't it so?
Maybe at a certain moment of, whatever, Greenwich Mean Time,
zero hours, when you looked up maybe you hit the heaven;
rest of the time you're always looking in the wrong direction. Isn't it so?
So in this cosmic space, is there somebody who knows which is up and which is down?
Does somebody know? Hmm? Is there somewhere is it marked, ‘This side up’?
Nobody knows which is up, which is down, it's just an assumption, isn't it?
Do you know really which is north, which is south?
In the real sense do you know what is north and south?
It is just for our convenience we just fixed it, isn't it? Yes or no?
Do you know what's east and west? No. Do you know what is forward and backward?
You do not know. None of these things you know.
There is only one thing you can be certain of right now –
this is, you know what is outward, what is inward; this one thing you're sure, isn't it?
This is inward, this is outward – this is the only privilege you have.
What is outward, what is inward, this is all you know.
Just in case some day if you get enlightened you will lose that also.
Yes. That’s what happened to me – now I don’t know which is inward, which is outward,
which is me, which is not me, that’s why I'm all over the world because I don’t know
whether this is me or that is me. So now you say, ‘I know what is inward, what is outward,’
let’s examine this a little more. Can you see me right now, all of you?
[Audience] Yes.
Can you see me? Just point out where I am? Use your hands and point out. Can you see me?
Oh, you got it wrong. You know I'm a mystic? You're getting it completely wrong.
Now this light is falling upon me, reflecting, going through your lenses,
inverted image in your retina – you know the whole story, right?
Where do you see me right now? Within yourself. Where do you hear me right now?
Within yourself. Where have you seen the whole world? Within yourself.
Have you ever experienced anything outside of yourself?
Everything that ever happened to you – darkness and light happened within you,
pain and pleasure happened within you, joy and misery happened within you.
Have you ever experienced anything outside of yourself? No.
So what I'm asking you is – what happens within you, who should determine how it should happen?
Hmm? What happens within you, who should determine how this should happen?
Somebody else? Definitely you should determine what should happen within this, isn't it?
So if you determine what's happening within this,
your whole experience of life will be determined by you, nobody else but you, isn't it?
The events around you may not be determined by you, but how your experience of life is
on this planet is hundred percent determined by you, if you take charge of this.
If you leave it loose, just about anybody will determine it.
They will – not consciously, they're also like you, by accident.
The question is not about
what you like.
The question is about
does everything around you like you,
have you made yourself in such a way
that nobody can help liking you?
You like something,
you dislike something,
it doesn’t mean anything,
because
both what you like
and what you dislike
are two different kinds of bondages.
Both what you like
and what you dislike
distort your perception.
If you like somebody,
you’ll exaggerate them in your mind.
If you dislike somebody,
for sure you’ll exaggerate them in your mind.
Exaggeration means
you’re unable to see things as they are.
If you’re unable to see things as they are,
you can never handle life the way it should be.
So liking and disliking exaggerates
either in positive ways or in negative ways,
but it exaggerates
or it distorts life.
So what you like is not important.
Have you made yourself in such a way,
not just people,
just everything likes you,
every creature around you likes your presence,
even the flowers,
the plants and the trees like you?
‘How can the plants and the trees like me?’
They’re very sensitive to who you are.
They’re extremely sensitive to who you are.
They respond accordingly.
If you make yourself in such a way
that the very earth that you walk upon likes you,
then you will see
everything in your life will become a blessing.
If everything around you dislikes you,
you will see
everything that could be a well-being
could become a curse.
Right now
there is no curse sitting upon human life.
It is things that people want,
it’s things that people aspire for,
things that they work for,
strive to have in their life,
which turn into curses in their life
their work,
their property,
their relationships,
their own body,
their own mind
which is the cancer of their life.
Misery is not raining.
Never it’s raining misery.
It’s just that things that you like
have become source of misery.
If you strive to make yourself in such a way
you cannot be helped
nobody can help liking you,
life will blossom better,
everything will yield their best to you,
not their worst.
But if you go by what you like,
not always life will yield its best;
you may have everything and still have nothing.
So spiritual process
is not about pursuing what you like,
it’s about striving to make yourself in such a way
even the birds like you,
the squirrels like you
it’s about making yourself in such a way
that every atom in this Existence likes you,
wants to yield to you.
If Existence does not yield to you,
you do what you want,
nothing will work in real sense.
You may do something,
you may become something,
you may earn a living,
you may make a living,
but nothing will happen.
You will just go through a cycle
without nothing tremendous touching your life.
For those of you who’re living in the ashram,
I want you to learn
to stand,
walk,
sit,
breathe,
in such a way that even the stones around you like you.
‘How do I know whether they like me or not?’
You will know for sure.
If you are sensitive about being like that,
you will also know
you will also be sensitive enough to know that.
You
If you are never sensitive about these aspects,
you will not have the sensitivity to know,
otherwise distinctly you will know.
Do not become in such a way
everything has to be shouted into your ears.
You must become in such a way
if you look at somebody before they speak, you know.
For this,
you need a certain sense of
receptivity
Receptivity will not happen to you
if you’re too full of yourself.
The less you are
the more you receive,
the more you are less you receive.
If you’re too full of yourself,
nothing bigger than your nonsense will happen to you.
If there’s no such thing as ‘myself’,
you simply sit here,
the whole existence will dance within you,
you will become an instrument of the Creator,
otherwise you will be a bundle of
thoughts, emotions, prejudices and rubbish.
This is the choice every human being has
either to exist here as a limb of the Creator,
as a Ishanga we’re calling them these days (Laughs),
or
to exist here
as a bundle of thoughts,
emotions
and nonsense that you have gathered.
This choice is available to us every moment of our life
continuously choosing,
continuously choosing to be like that.
If this striving is there
it will deliver you to a different place of gracefulness,
where
every stone,
every pebble,
every rock,
every tree,
every atom in the existence speaks to you
in a language that you can know,
otherwise you are alone in this vast existence
feeling constantly insecure,
unstable,
psychologically challenged.
This is the choice.
It is not a gift,
it is a choice.
One makes the right choice,
right things will happen;
one makes the wrong choice, wrong things will happen.
It’s a very fair and just existence,
I want you to know.
It doesn’t spare anybody.
It doesn’t spare anybody.
It’s not like a social structure
that some people can get away with wrong things.
In this existence it doesn’t spare anybody.
It doesn’t matter who you are,
if you jump off the roof,
the earth will break your leg.
Yes?
Raja Ranka Fakir (Laughs) (Referring to Kabir’s song, indicating all kinds of people)
everybody
nobody is spared.
it doesn’t matter who you are,
no exemptions,
and nobody is barred.
anybody who is willing,
for everybody the possibility is open.
For everybody
the stick is also there
You make the right choices everything is open;
make the wrong choices everything will knead you in a different way.
So if pain comes,
suffering comes,
misery happens it’s not time to look around.
This is always the problem.
If you’re miserable, you think somebody else needs to be fixed.
No, no, no, no.
If you’re miserable,
this (Referring to oneself) needs to be fixed, not somebody else.
‘No I’m miserable, fix the situation for me’.
No, no, no,
if you’re miserable, who should be fixed?
If you are sick, who should be given the medicine?
Shall we give it to somebody else when you’re sick?
If you’re hungry, shall we give the food to somebody else?
No,
it only works if you give it to this (Referring to oneself), isn’t it?
If food is like that,
medicine is like that,
is that not true with every other aspect?
That if you’re miserable,
something else or somebody else need not be fixed,
only this one (Referring to oneself) needs to be fixed.
Just to understand this simple fact,
people take lifetimes. (Laughs)
They think something else has to be fixed.
On a certain day,
Shankaran Pillai went drinking with his friends.
Yogis and drunkards both are timeless, you know.
They don’t know the passage of time.
He went drinking.
He intended to go back home at 8’o clock,
but drink after drink and time
he became unconscious of time.
When he looked at the watch (Gestures) (Laughter),
it was 02:30 AM.
So he thought it’s really late,
and he wants to get back home quickly
so he took a short cut.
And he was walking through his shortcut
on his unsteady legs and he fell into a thorny bush.
The whole face was scratched up.
So in this condition
he went home and tried to find the keyhole.
That took another half-an-hour. (Laughter)
Opened,
went inside,
went into the bathroom and looked at himself in the mirror,
he was bleeding all over the face.
So he opened the medicine chest fixed himself
whichever way he could
and
quietly crawled into the bed and slept.
Morning 8’o clock,
his wife took a bucket of cold water
and threw it in his face;
he got up.
Said, ‘You idiot, once again drinking?’
He said,
‘No honey, I haven’t touched a drop.
Six months ago when I promised,
since then I haven’t touched a drop.’
She held him by the shirt,
dragged him into the bathroom and showed him,
the band-aid was all over the mirror. (Laughter/Applause)
It doesn’t work like that.
Only somebody who is completely unconscious will do such things.
If it’s hurting here you’ll fix it there (Gestures),
because you’re completely unconscious or inebriated.
So whenever you’re miserable you want to fix that one and that one and that one;
no, no, no;
this one (Referring to oneself) needs to be fixed.
If you put band-aid on the mirror it doesn’t heal your wounds.
You have to attend to the wound.
and
both your miseries and joys are caused from inside.
So it needs to be attended here, not somewhere else.
The sooner you learn this,
the more graceful and wonderful your life will become.
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan: Sadhguru, before we go into the issue of politics and corruption,
because all of us love to hate politicians.
Sadhguru: I wouldn’t allow that
because it’s become a fashion and a fad
and almost a compulsion
that wherever you go,
people are talking politics
how horrible the politicians are –
whether they know about it or they don’t know about it
from a tea shop, to an office and wherever else it's happening.
If you are a responsible citizen,
what democracy means is,
it is the people’s government.
These politicians did not land from the sky.
They’re one among you, who stood up to do something.
Now for whatever reasons, they’ve become the way they’ve become.
You do not know how many have become like that,
how many not.
We’re generalizing because we have a certain pleasure
in painting everything very bleak and black.
If your nation is important for you
and if you believe that you have handed over your nation to a bunch of crooks
and you’re sitting here and it's entertainment for you,
I think it is you who need to be punished, not the corrupt. (Applause)
Because democracy cannot be a spectator sport,
it is a participatory process.
If I say participatory,
most people’s understanding of this is,
if I come out once in five years and vote,
my responsibility is over.
No,
democracy has various instruments through which you can participate
on a daily basis in the governance of your country,
your state,
your city
and your street.
There are various mechanisms.
‘Oh, I don’t know.’
Why you don’t know?
Because you’ve not cared, isn’t it?
Why you have not educated yourself to know
is you have not cared
because the idea of the nation has not gone deep enough in this country.
Still, our identifications with our religions,
our caste, our creed, our family is more predominant
than the identity of the nation.
This is the reason why these things are happening.
So democracy in India is still in an evolutionary state,
needs lot more evolution
and nobody has done to educate people
as to what is democracy.
Not enough work has been done.
It has not been brought into our education systems.
Social organizations,
the government itself should have taken it up in a big way to educate people,
why democracy.
See, the moment we vote for our religion,
or caste or creed or even family,
if you vote, there is no democracy anymore.
There is only feudalism, isn’t it? (Applause)
Democracy will be a functional democracy,
only when
you go and vote and you don’t know who your wife voted for,
who your husband voted for
and you don’t want to know.
Only if you have this kind of integrity,
democracy will work.
You tell your whole family,
‘You vote for this person’ –
this is not democracy, it's finished.
I’m saying that has not been understood at all.

Questioner: Please relate fear,
apathy
and success.
How to conquer fear
and apathy on the way to success?
That’s all.
Sadhguru: Okay. Fear about, ‘Whether I will be successful or not?’
Where does apathy come in?
No, your individual fear about,
‘Whether I will be successful or not?’
Is that what you're talking?
See, that’s… that’s exactly what I have been telling you till now;
do not even think of success,
just enhance your capabilities,
strive to enhance who you are,
then what you can do you will anyway do, isn't it?
Right now, you have an idea of success
but you don’t have the competence for that.
You want to go somewhere,
but you don’t have the legs to get there.
Now naturally there will be fear,
naturally there’ll be all kinds of unnecessary struggles and emotions –
instead of that, at this stage in your life if you just focus on seeing
how to enhance this human being to the highest possible level that you can,
success will be a downhill run,
not an uphill task.
So if you're going downhill, there is no fear, isn't it?
Because, ‘Whether I can get there or not,
whether I can get there or not.’
You're working towards somebody else’s idea of success.
You're working towards somebody else’s idea of success;
that is not success.
Your success is you as a human being
you found your full potential,
this is your success and that’s all you can do.
Whether you stand on your head or you stand on your feet
the best that you can do.
If this human being finds his fullest potential, that’s all you can do.
No matter what you do, you cannot do more, isn't it?
Certain circumstances sometimes will lift us up,
certain circumstances sometimes may not,
but in the given circumstance if you have blossomed to your fullest level,
you will do well, isn't it?
Don’t think of success and be fearful about it,
just see how to make this one more and more capable.
If the competence and capability is there,
success will come as we deserve it.
(Sadhguru): Good evening everyone.
(Shantanu): Sadhguru, to start with,
one of the things that I was very curious to know from you,
was when we talk about education,
what has been your own experience,
your own personal experience in education?
Within education,
what has shaped you
or not shaped you,
to the person that you have become today?
(Sadhguru): That’s a googly.
There are no children,
so I think I can share.
My experience of education
people ask me,
‘What is my sadhana?’
So usually I tell them,
‘The only
my sadhana has been to remain uneducated.’
Because, when I first went to school,
I had no clue why I’m going.
Probably, the grown-up people just assumed that children must go to school.
Nobody bothers to tell you,
‘Why is it that you have to go to this place?
What’s so important about this place
that we have to go?’
They were saying things,
but which didn’t mean anything to me.
So my time of education
I only went there when I really had to.
And even when I went there,
my main problem was this
I always found people were talking about things
that were not important to them.
I’ve always maintained this in my life,
it doesn’t matter what rubbish somebody is speaking,
if it means something to them,
I will listen absolutely.
Whatever nonsense it may be,
but it means something to that person,
I’m willing to listen.
If it does not mean anything to the person who is speaking,
I don’t understand why I should listen.
And I always found in the school,
teachers were talking about something that doesn’t mean anything to them.
So my ears were never there with them.
So, the less said about my education better.
And when I was about seventeen,
I decided I will educate myself
because it didn’t make sense to go to college.
And, you know it’s not like today,
these ideas of sabbatical,
this, that did not exist.
You’re racing to become a doctor.
If you cannot, you become an engineer.
These are only two things that are there.
So, when I
when I passed my… at that time it was called PUC,
the twelfth standard,
and I said, ‘I’m not going to college.’
The horror that happened in the family is unbelievable.
Then I thought okay,
the good thing would have been, I should have failed.
If… Because I passed and I say, ‘I’m not going to university’,
there was such shock and such
as if tragedy has struck the family.
I couldn’t believe what they were getting so upset about,
because anyway I was not learning anything.
I was just going, coming and just getting passing marks and going on.
So this one year, I spent in the university
you know, Mysore University has a great library;
I spent my time one whole year.
Every day when the library opened at nine o’clock in the morning, I was there.
They closed at eight in the evening, they had to push me out.
This one year, I just read just about anything, you know
Science, history, geography, literature, just about anything,
from popular mechanics to Homer,
I read just about whatever came my way.
This one whole year,
because… suddenly I had become a… kind of an enemy in the family,
because I’ve not gone to college.
Everybody else is educated and you’re not going to college
and you’ve passed and you’re not going.
So morning I ate big breakfast and went.
This whole year I went without lunch.
I came back home and ate dinner in the night.
One full year. I was
when I was young, I was always hungry.
I was just all the time hungry.
It’s not easy for people to understand
what it took for me, to sit there without eating for one year and
just reading whatever I feel like.
So I thought I’ll educate myself.
Probably the maximum amount of reading,
happened at that part of my life.
Why I’m saying this is,
what you pursue, you will never forget.
What is imposed upon you will never be useful in your life.
So when we decided to
when I decided that we must start a school,
people rolled their eyeballs,
‘Sadhguru, you?’
I said, ‘Yes, but this school should be different.’
And I spoke to them for a few days continuously,
a few people who are involved with us as to what a school should be.
I remember very well,
I was in my sixth standard. The President of India died.
And we went to school and they declared a holiday.
That’s a good thing, you know!
If it happened when you’re at home, it’s different.
But you went to school and then you found out, there’s no school today
and two days, no school.
So we sat outside and we were discussing
and we just thought,
if the Prime Minister goes what will happen,
if the Chief Minister goes what will happen.
We
we literally killed the whole Cabinet.
How many days will we get this year?
So why is school such a horrible place to go to?
Something is wrong in the way we’re delivering it because,
education
I mean, for what purpose we’re educating people also we need to look at it,
that’s a more
much more profound thing.
But essentially, at the delivery end,
at the
at the last part of education system, it’s a very human thing.
If that human thing is missing,
I don’t see why any child will sit there
and listen to somebody,
who blabbers something which doesn’t mean anything to them.
Because parents are psyching them,
‘Unless you go to school, you won’t make a living;
this will happen to you,
that will happen to you.
If you go to school, I’ll send you to America.’
All this kind of rubbish,
not to really educate themselves.
So when we started the school, these
When I spoke to them about
how school should be, then our teachers asked,
‘Sadhguru, this is a tall vision.
How do we know that we are even fulfilling it?’
I said, ‘See,’ –
this is a residential school –
I said, ‘Four months, they stay with us.
At the end of four months,
when they’re going home for their vacation,
if children are crying to go home,
that means you’re doing well.
If they’re crying to come back to school,
that means we’re not doing well.’
You won’t believe!
Today you will see this in Isha Home School,
when they’re leaving, they’re crying.
Before the vacation is over, eight days,
ten days before the vacation is over,
children are back, setting up the school.
So that’s good!
They’re enjoying their schooling process.
Because if that doesn’t happen –
how, why are we torturing our children like this?
For what end, what purpose?
(Questioner): Sadhguru, what can I do for my guru,
how can I support you I felt that
I want to do something, I don’t know what.
(Sadhguru): The best thing you can do is don’t poison yourself with all those things,
that’s the best thing you can do for your guru
I want all of you to remember this
the best thing that you can ever do for you guru,
if at all if you feel like you want to do is,
that you drop your nonsense and grow.
What's the best thing a garden can do for a gardener?
Hum?
To grow and bloom, isn't it?
‘No, no, we want to do this to you,
we want to do that to you,’
that’s not the intention,
that’s not the goal.
The best thing you can do for anybody is
you must do what they want, isn't it?
Hum?
Not what you want.
Always this is the problem,
the best thing you can do for anybody is you must do what they want.
All this activity... …I'm a very
people have
who have known me early,
I was an extremely taciturn person.
I never said anything –
there were days when I never
I was not on silence nor was I spiritual, okay,
I was just there.
Because most of the time,
whether you went to school or college or
wherever you went,
whether the student spoke or the teacher spoke,
everybody spoke such nonsense.
Most of the time I chose to remain silent
because
I was terrified of their conversations.
If they opened their mouth,
if they did not kill you will their bare breath
they killed you with horrible conversation.
Very few people on this planet can simply joyfully say something,
it doesn’t matter
you don’t have to say some great thing;
simply pouring out of their heart
saying something
or simply able to be with another person
very few people.
All others are desperately trying to be smart
or they're repeating something they heard somewhere,
something they read somewhere,
some nonsense endlessly.
So, I would never speak.
Very rarely I would speak.
In some places
I was exuberantly boisterous
but in most of the other places I was
because I understood if I don’t speak they won't speak, that saves me. (Laughs)
So, now all this endless talking,
this activity nonstop,
doesn’t matter where I am,
constantly I'm in groups of people,
not even with individual people,
constantly with huge groups of people
either in public sitting behind a microphone
or wherever I walk there's minimum 10 people around me.
So
this is not my personal choice;
this is a terrible need that there is in the world,
that if you do not communicate the way people know,
if you do not behave and act the way people know right now,
if you don’t walk two steps with them
you can never walk them in a different direction.
Hum?
So, there is nothing you can do;
the best thing you can do is you grow and blossom,
drop your nonsense.
Your past nonsense you leave it to me,
present nonsense you handle.
If you do that that’s the best thing.
‘No, suppose you died’
even if I died
I will not stop the spiritual part of my activity.
So, I'm not so concerned about that.
Yes we’re concerned,
the foundation could be hurt,
activity could be hurt
but not the spiritual part of the work,.
The concern is that people will be here and if they don’t grow.
I've planted people in my garden
and they never blossomed,
that I'm terrified of.
So, those of you who’re very patient
who want to come here for 10 lifetimes and do it,
I'm okay with them
but I think we must build an outer ashram for them.
Even here there is in a way
but we wouldn’t like that to be here because of various reasons,
we would like everybody who comes here to be absolutely there in the very core of
what's happening.
I don’t want to create a core and a periphery here.
Here there's only one burning spot
that’s everywhere.
So, if you
you know you’ve seen the popcorn?
You’ve never seen popcorn?
Hum?
See, just a damn corn how it flowered –
the right amount of heat but some get burnt,
some won't pop,
that’s because they don’t
all of them were given the same heat
but some don’t receive it properly,
they do funny things and instead of popping
they get charred.
Instead of flowering
have you seen a popcorn flowering?
Hum?
That’s one flower you can see it happening, right;
the other flowers take too much time.
So, right there it opens up in front of you.
So, have you seen this happening to people?
When they come to Inner Engineering,
Bhava Spandana,
in three days’ time
people are like that.
But we don’t want them to stop there
because we are Athanaiku Aasaipadu people.
You know what that means?
We desire for everything,
we don’t desire for this much growth or that much growth;
we are not willing to settle for anything less than the whole.
If you are willing to settle for peace
we could settle you very easily.
If you're willing to settle for love
we would settle you very easily.
If you're willing to settle for blissfulness we could settle you very easily
but we’re Athanaiku Aasaipadu,
we won't settle for anything,
we want it all.
Because of that kind of mode
we’re just on and on and on.
If you're willing to settle for any one of those things
peace, love, satisfaction, happiness,
we could have settled you up very easily.
So, if you just want to settle for any one of them it’s okay,
it's your choice
but then you need not be in the core of things,
you could be anywhere and still do that,
you know.
‘So, what could I do?’
Especially if Sadhguru is going to die tomorrow
you must blossom tonight, isn't it?
Hum?
So, I want you to look at life like this
either you may die or I may die tomorrow morning,
so something should happen tonight.
Isn't it so?
Hum?
So, don’t think in terms of weeks and months and years and decades
or lifetimes,
think in terms of moments because life is in moments.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I’m going to take the liberty, Sadhguru,
to do what I normally do on my television show,
which is a rapid fire round.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): The
Normally the end of this round
Sadhguru: (Overlapping conversation) See, I’ve… When I was young,
I watched a lot of, you know,
Wild West movies (Karan Johar laughs).
When you fire, I also fire, all right (Laughter/Applause)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, but I promise you,
this is not that kind of
you are not in my line of fire (Sadhguru laughs) at all.
I will not take the liberty of being that person (Laughs).
These are just quick questions, which when I ask for one word,
you have to stick to that
because sometimes you have a tendency of not exactly answering the question asked (Laughter).
But you give such a profound and prolific retort back that it makes you very satiated.
But in this case, my only request is that if it’s one word,
then it’s just one word (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Okay.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And the end of this normally,
you get a hamper (Laughter).
But in the absence of a hamper here, you already have
Sadhguru: A cow (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): …something right… Yes.
So (Laughs)… And… Or this beautiful bouquet that is right next to you.
But so there is no hamper
but you do will get my utmost gratitude (Both laugh).
Thank you.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): All right, very simply,
what is the one thing that is essential to living a balanced life?
Sadhguru: Sense (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is the one thing we must absolutely do away with
in order to lead a balanced life?
Sadhguru: Senselessness (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): All right,
I thought that was coming.
First thing that comes to your mind when I say the following –
the first thing. Organized religion.
Sadhguru: Madness.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Marriage.
Sadhguru: Cohabitation (Karan Johar laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Competition.
Sadhguru: Stupid.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Money.
Sadhguru: Useful.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Love.
Sadhguru: Can I say a sentence (Laughter/Applause)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yes.
I will allow that (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Most beautiful but unfortunately crippling for most people (Applause).
If I can little elaborate that
See, if something unpleasant cripples you,
something nasty cripples you, tch, it’s acceptable.
When something beautiful cripples you,
it’s a true disaster (Laughs) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): If you could ask one person alive or dead,
one question,
who would you ask and what would that be (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: I really sorted out all my questions because
I did not spend time educating myself
or doing anything,
I spent my entire life sorting out every damn question I had.
I kind of run out of questions (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And you certainly have not run out of any answers (Laughter)
and you never will.
Best advice you have ever received?
Sadhguru: Nothing.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Never?
Sadhguru: No.
I never sought, nor did I receive.
I made myself in such a way,
I’m incapable either of seeking advice or giving advice (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): In an imaginary,
completely hypothetical situation,
if you had a day off with no commitments,
no responsibilities,
what would you spend the day doing?
Sadhguru: Oh! There’re lot of things,
this can't be one word (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, it’s not one word.
Sadhguru: See, I have an indescrimate...
indiscriminate sense of passion towards everything.
There were lots and lots of things I did at one time
but these days, time is not allowing me to do that.
So generally if I have little time, all I do is play golf
because that’s safe and within the city
and I can get back in time for something else to be done.
But if an entire day is left to me –
which they have not done for a long time (Laughs),
they’ve not left it to me –
if that happens, I will close my eyes and sit
because that is my... the best... the best...
I am at my best when I truly have nothing to do (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is one thing you’d like people to remember about you at the end of your life?
Sadhguru: They must live so wonderfully that they don’t even remember me (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): If you found a way to travel through time,
where would you go?
Sadhguru: I’m kind of done with all those things (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You’re universe visited already,
you have visas for every part (Laughs) of this ecosystem.
Sadhguru: If we can do some slow fire...
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah.
Sadhguru: ...because that’s a question with many ramifications.
This
For example, traveling in the world,
we’ve jetted around and now we want to travel to the Mars,
we want to travel to another place.
And now that’s not enough,
we want to travel into the past and future.
All this longing is again exploratory in nature.
Whether you go on vacation to Maldives
or you want to go to Mars,
it is fundamentally exploratory.
Maybe you’re also thinking of relaxation and pleasure and whatever,
but essentially it’s exploratory,
otherwise why can’t you do it here?
It’s something that you want to do,
you want to touch another place.
This longing is there in the human being
only as long as the life that you are remains in a seed form,
that is, it did not sprout and blossom.
This happened.
When Adiyogi was expounding the science of yoga
and talking about the nature of the cosmos,
how it’s related to your individual self
and what you can do with it,
then the seven sages who were with him,
they asked, “What is the nature of this cosmos?
How big is it?
Where does it begin, where does it end?”
So he laughed and said,
“Your entire cosmos, I can pack it into a mustard seed.”
Because your ideas of time and space are essentially
because you’re living within the framework of your intellect.
If you cross that dimension,
then there is no such thing as time and space.
Everything is here and now.
So, traveling through time, space –
no, it means nothing to me because...
It’s difficult to express,
difficult to articulate.
If I sound little
I have a reputation of being very logical
but if I sound illogical or silly to you,
you can blame it on my jetlag.
I’ve just come from United States after six weeks,
so you can say,
“Maybe he was jetlagged, that’s why Sadhguru’s saying something silly.”
But I’m fine.
I’m saying this because
you can't fit the universe into your silly little logic.
Today’s human being is too overly enamored with their own logic,
that they’re missing the entire life.
The gamut of phenomena that’s happening in the existence is missed
because the only way you can accept anything is
it has to fit into the square hole of your logic.
Anything that doesn’t fit into your logic,
you will reject.
In this, you’ve rejected the entire cosmos.
In this, you’ve rejected the magic of life.
You have become a slave of logic
and completely missing the magic of life.
So, this time, space, all this stuff is because
intellectually you’re trying to dissect the universe
and try to understand this, this, this.
Tell me, if you sit here,
suppose you’re very joyful,
do you see, you will not know how the day passed off?
And if you’re depressed,
do you see the day won’t pass?
So time is a consequence of the miserable nature of human existence.
If you were truly blissed out and ecstatic,
you wouldn’t know what is a day,
what is a year,
what is a lifetime.
You wouldn’t know.
There’ve been times, I sat down,
I didn’t realize, I thought it’s five minutes
but people gathered around and started molesting my feet (Laughter).
No, because they...
in their understanding I sat there for many days or whatever.
This idea of time and space is a very convoluted idea,
simply because people are stuck in the framework of their logic.
My work, my fundamental work is to take people
beyond the framework of logic into the true magic of existence,
our own existence.
But it takes a lot of time.
Still my reputation is of being very logically correct
because I’m still trying to woo them, tch (Both laugh).
Still wooing them, you know (Laughs)?
For the real thing to happen,
they will take a long time unfortunately
because they have become such slaves of their logic.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is the first thing you notice when you meet a person?
Sadhguru: Just everything.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Everything?
Sadhguru: Everything. Past, present and future (Karan Johar laughs) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Is it more important to do what you love or love what you’re doing?
Sadhguru: One word or more (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): The choice is entirely yours.
Sadhguru: See, if you are an intelligent person, you will try to do what you love most.
But if you’re a genius, you will do just what is needed (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): If you could be invisible for a day, what would you do (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: You wouldn’t know (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): With due respect, what is your biggest weakness?
Sadhguru: Hmm? Biggest (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): What is your biggest weakness?
Sadhguru: See, what normally people treat as weakness in their lives...
Okay, let me give a normal answer,
why...
why am I going into all this?
Already you said I’m... what?
What is the word?
Sashayed hmm (Both laugh)?
My biggest weakness is I love danger.
Without danger, I cannot live.
I need to do something, which...
which keeps me on the edge of being mortal,
being alive and dead.
I want to walk that line all the time.
Every day I’m stepping on it one way or the other (Few applaud).
Is it a weakness?
I don’t think so,
but people think. “Sadhguru, you shouldn’t risk your life like this.”
But if there’s no risk,
I’m feel...
I feel I’m not being...
Because most of the time in my life,
for whatever I’m doing,
I don’t feel tested.
It’s only in moments of danger that I feel little tested.
So my weakness is, I like to be stretched, you know?
For all the time when I was riding across India
and later on I started driving,
my only wish was that... to find a machine,
which will test my skills.
Always found the damn things broke down if I took it to my limits.
These days recently,
I’m beginning to get to do a few machines,
which are testing me,
whether I can push it all the way or not (Both laugh).
Maybe that’s because of my age (Karan Johar laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No.
Sadhguru: If I had met them much younger, I think I would have
Interviewer (Karan Johar): You would have managed to work around them (Sadhguru laughs).
One thing the world doesn’t know about you?
Sadhguru: They don’t know a thing about me (Laughter/Applause).
That’s a fact (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): And the one thing you wish you could change about yourself?
Sadhguru: Oh, I never looked at that (Few laugh).
I could speak Hindi (Laughter/Applause).
No, I’m sorry, Marathi (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): The one thing you wish you could change about the world?
Sadhguru: Tch, oh, a lot of things.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): One.
Sadhguru: Human beings (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Desperately in need of (Sadhguru laughs).
Sir, what would you consider to be your greatest achievement?
Sadhguru: I don’t think there’s any
because I always fall woefully short of my own expectation of what I could do (Applause).
So, I never feel anything is an achievement (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Is there a song you love
and can listen to all the time?
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs)! I somehow...
(Someone starts singing Tamil song Alai Alai) (Laughter)
No (Laughs).
Probably because this came to me at a certain time
when I was in my early teens maybe,
so this one song kind of comes back to me more often than anything else.
It’s not that I even seek it but somehow, one way or the other,
this song keeps coming back to me, is
“How many times” (Referring to Blowing in the Wind by Bob Dylan) (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Okay, okay. I know you haven’t seen any of my films
but do you have a favorite film?
Sadhguru: Oh! I’ve seen many good movies.
At one time, I saw a lot of them.
I’ve not seen much of Indian cinema
but I saw a lot of, you know, English cinema.
But one movie that I thoroughly, thoroughly enjoyed at that time
because on that day the way things happened,
many life situations fell together and everything,
was Roman Holiday.
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Oh (Applause)!
Well, I have to say that that’s the first film I’ve ever seen in my life,
my mother took me to the cinema (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: Here we are!
Interviewer (Karan Johar): It is true,
Roman Holiday is the first film I ever saw,
it was my introduction to the big screen (Sadhguru laughs).
I’m glad I have something in common with you (Laughter).
Sadhguru: That image of Audrey and Gregory Peck is...
somehow just stayed with me (Laughs).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Wonderful.
Sadhguru: It was probably my age (Both laugh).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): Yeah, it must have been.
Something you enjoy doing and wish you had more time for?
Sadhguru: I wish I had more time
because I made myself like this,
that there is nothing that I enjoy or do not enjoy.
I make sure I enjoy everything that I do,
including simply sitting quietly,
or talking to somebody, or doing whatever.
Because my activity is not limited to one area,
so many things.
If you did not enjoy everything that you do and do not do,
you will go insane trying to manage so many things.
But I’ll not go insane because
I enjoy being alive.
Activity is...
Anything is okay.
Everything I do, I enjoy (Both laugh).
Small things, big things, every kind of thing.
Most profound things and silly things, I enjoy thoroughly (Both laugh) (Applause).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): As should us all.
Lastly, in a biopic made on you, who would play you (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: But who would make a biopic, first of all (Laughter)?
Interviewer (Karan Johar): No, there would be lots of interested people.
Sadhguru: Maybe you should animate (Laughter).
Interviewer (Karan Johar): I don’t think you would want that (Both laugh).
Well, that is the end of the rapid fire
and you totally deserve the hamper that doesn’t exist on this platform (Laughter).
But it’s a virtual hamper that I’ve given to you
with my (Both laugh) love, gratitude and deepest amount of respect.
Thank you (Both laugh) (Applause).
Sadhguru: Thank you.
Sadhguru: Health is not just an absence of disease.
Health means,
the word health comes from the word “whole”.
When an individual human being feels complete
physically, mentally, emotionally and spiritually –
that’s when health is.
When the life within you is bouncing with vibrance,
when the life within you is effervescent –
that’s when health happens.
If we have to build this into a human being,
this has to happen at the earliest time in his life.
If healthful living
How a human being can live healthy,
what he should consume,
what should be the nature of his practice
and different aspects of how he should sleep,
how he should wake up,
all these things were built into our culture in the past.
But in the last generation
we have distorted this heavily
because of certain western influences
which are only about treating the disease,
not about creating health from within.
Nobody can give us health
health is our responsibility.
This has to be brought into our curriculum
that every child in this country should learn
how to generate health for himself,
not wait for a healthcare system
to help him later in his life
but he must become the main healthcare provider for himself,
because health can only be organized from within.
The earlier it is introduced the better it is.
It is important that we as a nation
all that we have is a large mass of people,
these 1.25 billion people,
if we have a healthful, focused and inspired population,
we as a nation can become a miracle.
If we have an unhealthy population,
which will naturally be uninspired
and not “ready for action” kind of population,
we can become the greatest disaster.
Right now India is moving towards this disaster rapidly.
It is time to turn it around
by bringing healthful ways of living at the earliest point in one’s life.
So the school systems,
the education system has to introduce
as to how a human being can live healthy.
This has to happen to this country
because large-scale movement towards ill-health is happening
and it is something that we can ill-afford.
It is not something that this nation can handle.
The richest nations in the world,
like United States of America,
their health bills are sinking their economy.
We need not move in that way.
Right now we have a youthful population but not very healthy.
It's time we bring health and
manifestation of health into our school systems
and make it work for us as a nation.
Tracey: The….. Interesting now that I live in Veterans Administration
and I interface quite a bit with the department of Defense,
a statistics I was
I was in a meeting not very long ago
and someone from the department of Defense said,
‘Do you know this?
Health in this country is an issue of national security’
and I thought for a minute like,
‘What’s he talking about, right?’ (Sadhguru Laughs)
Because eighty percent of people that walk into a recruitment office for the Armed Services
doesn’t even qualify to be considered for service,
eighty percent because of their health status
So the dominant medical paradigm which is we have a disease that we have to fight.
And our… you… it’s revealed in the language that we use,
you know, antibiotics, anti-psychotics, anti… anti… anti… the concept
the disease, it’s over there and the job of medicine is to fight that battle and win.
Sadhguru: See this… this whole concept and this approach to modern medicine has come
because you need to understand
when they thought of medicine
when they thought of developing some kind of medicine
and a system of medical treatment,
their problem was only with infectious diseases and contagious diseases.
How to treat the plague?
How to treat the small pox?
How to treat this?
Nobody ever thought of a diabetes or a hypertension or a cardiac problem.
They never even considered those things that did not exist in their radar.
In their radar,
only infectious diseases did exist.
That has to be handled on a war footing,
no question about that because it is a war.
An infection means it’s an invasion from another organism upon our own system
and you have to use chemical weapons. (Laughter)
You can’t shoot them.
So this whole medical system evolved from the need to handle infectious diseases,
contagious diseases which were taking a huge toll on populations in those times.
But today we have come to a place
where people are on self-help.
That is, they manufacture their own diseases, (Laughter)
they don’t wait for any infection to happen to them. (Laughs)
Because now they are on self-help,
they need another system of medicine,
another way to approach it completely which is a shift we are struggling to make right now. (Laughs)
I must tell you this experience.
We had a yogic hospital in our yoga center in India.
We called it yogic hospital.
We did not want it to grow too much
because we don’t want to turn into a hospital fulltime;
we are a spiritual center. (Laughs)
So we’re keeping it low-key.
Once when I came here, I spoke and a few doctors
American doctors who were interested, they traveled to India.
They came and stayed there for three days and after three days,
one of the volunteers came and told me,
‘All the American doctors are up in arms. They want to leave.’
I said, ‘What happened?’
They said, ‘It’s best that you meet them. They’re just… off.’
Then I said, ‘Okay’ and I went to meet them.
Then I said, ‘What’s the problem?’
They said, ‘You said there is a hospital.
Where is the hospital? There is no hospital here.’
I said, ‘Right now, there are about sixty and odd patients.’
They said, ‘Where is it?’
Their idea of a hospital is that there must be beds,
you must treat sick well and everybody should be
if you treat them so well, they will not want to become healthy. (Laughter)
‘Where are the patients?’
I said, ‘They’re all in the garden. I put them to work. (Laughter)
We give them the treatment and therapies and medication but rest of the time,
I put them to work.
Whatever they can do, they must do.
Above all, they must sit and work barefoot and bare hands in… with the soil.’
Just being in touch with the planet because you are just a drop of this planet.
You are forgetting that.
What you call as my body is just a piece of the planet, isn’t it?
If you lose connection with the source, will you not get disorganized?
There are specific scientific ways of doing that.
If you cannot do any of those things,
at least just let them walk in a farm barefoot,
work, do something,
you will see at least sixty-seventy percent of them will just come out of their problems
just like that,
just being in touch with this.
(Questioner): I just want to know, like,
this yoga is making me very delicate
and it is actually making me
(Sadhguru): So you're one of the ardent followers, is it?
Give the microphone to the students
Okay, finish the question.
(Questioner): I just want to know, like, in this world which is
lot of people if our love is boundless, some people are manipulative.
So like should we restrict it or should we be
should we not expect anything?
How to handle it?
(Sadhguru): What is this question?
Yoga is making you delicate, what is that?
(Questioner): Like, it's making my love boundless.
It's not making me to choose people.
In work place, in personal life, I'm meaning to say,
there are lot of back stabbers around.
(Sadhguru): Oh, oh! You're beginning to fall in love with your neighbors also. (Laughter)
Now,
please understand this --
the yoga that you're practicing
is about enhancing the interiority of who you are.
The outside has to be conducted as it needs to be conducted.
When you do not know how to conduct the outside,
you think it's because of your love -- it's not so,
it's just because of your stupidity
that you cannot conduct the situation the way you want it, isn't it?
So if you're driving on the street and you see a buffalo
and
if you go give it a kiss and say, 'Please, I love you, please move away,'
buffalo is not the problem, isn't it?
You are the problem, yes or no?
Is buffalo the problem?
Buffalo is behaving according to its nature;
you are not behaving according to your nature,
that's the problem with you.
So that is not because of love,
that is because of confusion and whatever,
and that definitely yoga has not done that to you.
Yoga brings clarity to you, not confusion. (Laughs)
So our ability to handle situations,
if they're impaired because of some fanciful idea
of love or whatever nonsense you have,
then that's not love,
that's just
you're silly and soft in your head, isn't it?
Should love empower you? Okay, even if you're loving,
should love empower you or impair you?
It should empower you, isn't it?
If it's impairing you, it's not love.
You have some convoluted idea about love.
If you love somebody, will you do pretty things to them always or
will you do what's needed? Hmm?
You'll do what's needed, isn't it?
If you have a child and you love this child,
if you have to feed him you feed him,
if you have to hug him you hug him, if you have to whack him you whack him,
you do what's needed, isn't it?
So love does not make you lose your discretion.
If love, if you're losing your discretion,
it is because you're becoming a Dhritarashtra.
You know a Dhritarashtra problem?
Nation is right now gripped with a Dhritarashtra problem.
You don't know what that is?
You don't know what Dhritarashtra is?
Dhritarashtra, you've heard of the man? Ah! That guy.
He's the biggest influence right now on the country. (Laughs)

Juhi Chawla: We have one question from the social media the Face book (Laughter).
Amit Madan wants to know
in this materialistic age the real feeling of love is disappearing from our life,
most of the love we receive from others
and express to others is superficial.
How can we reinforce the real feeling of love
in our own life and in others?
Sadhguru: Forget about others.
If you
if you learn to be loving
by your own nature
not because of somebody else or something else.
I know the question is coming from Facebook
there’s an enormous possibility (Laughter).
You can even love those people who don’t even exist (Laughter).
So, I’m saying it’s a tremendous possibility.,
So (Laughs)
if you just become love,
not love somebody
then you will know the nature of love.
If you love somebody
it’s a fickle happening
because no human being will happen a hundred percent the way you want them.
Every human being on this planet is going to disappoint you believe me
not because they’ll do something wrong
because nobody can fulfill the unrealistic expectation you have of them.
It’s simply not possible.,
Have you been able to fulfill anybody’s expectation
I’m asking you entirely?
Partially but never entirely, isn’t it?
So nobody else will be able to do it
unless you’re a still such a hopeless romantic
you’re still waiting that ideal person is going to come from somewhere –
No!
Believe me whoever comes,
I want you to know the ideal people whom you worship
when Krishna was there his wives complained (Laughter) all right?.
Juhi Chawla: So there is no hope for us please remember this.
Sadhguru: Once
you walk the spiritual path,
this question and this struggle of
how much of spiritual process should I do
and how much of
whatever is called as life I should do?
And for most people the struggle is
when they are involved in their day-to-day
day-to-day materialistic functions of life,
they will long for the spiritual process.
If you give them a spiritual process,
they will long to go back to their materialistic way of life.
So how much of what
or how should I do these two things?
You should do your materialistic life
When we say materialistic,
that which concerns and satisfies
one’s physical body and one’s mind is materialistic life.
It’s not right to divide this,
but anyway invariably people divide it.
So that which satisfies your body and your mind,
how much of it you should do
or how you should do means
you must do it like you are going to live for ever.
How much or how I should do my spiritual process –
you must do it like today is your last day.
Mhmm?
Hmm? Hmm?
Which way is it?
No.
On a certain day
a hunter caught a little bird,
a tiny little bird,
and he was about to take its life,
then the little bird said,
‘You have caught and eaten many far bigger animals in your life,
but it has not satisfied your hunger.
Me, a little bird,
this much I am,
what can I do for you?
So why kill me?
If you allow me to live
I’ll give you three invaluable teachings
with which your life will be phenomenally rich.
One teaching I will give you
when I am still in your hand.
The second teaching I will give you
when I sit upon the roof of your house.
The third teaching I’ll give you when I sit on top of that tree.’
Then the hunter thought about it,
looked at this little bird,
it doesn’t even work as an appetizer
too small!
So he said,
‘Okay, give me the teaching.’
The first teaching that the bird gave is,
‘Does not matter who,
whatever pronouncements they make,
don’t ever believe it.’
Took off from his hand, went and sat on top of the roof,
and then it said,
‘You fool, you let me go.
Do you know who I am?
Within my belly I have a diamond which weighs five ounces.’
Then the man started wailing about his misfortune,
‘Oh such a huge diamond I let it go,
what a fool I am!’
Then the bird said,
‘You are definitely a fool.
I already told you
never believe any pronouncements made by anybody,
whoever they may be.
See, I weigh just two ounces,
how can I have a diamond five ounces in my belly,
you fool?
So the second teaching is,
‘Never look back and regret at anything that is past,’
and then flew and went and sat on top of the tree
The man started screaming and wailing,
‘No, I missed the diamond.
Now you’re telling me not to regret.
You fooled me.’
Then the bird went and sat there and waited.
Then he recovered,
‘Okay never regret for what has happened.
Okay, tell me what's the third teaching?’
The bird said,
‘Anyway you did not listen to the first two.
What is the use of the third?
Never waste your energies and wisdom
upon those who don’t listen.
That’s the third teaching’ and flew away.
Now whatever I say
it's not going to work.
Now your materialistic life,
you must live it as if you’re going to die today.
Your spiritual life you must do it that you are eternal.
Not the other way round.
Don’t say this to everything.
‘No Sadhguru, whatever you say.
That’s not true.
If that is really true,
that you have become like this,
that there is no value for reason in your life,
you have become a devotee
and there is no value for reason.
Then all these teachings no good, don’t bother,
just
You know, when we were doing the Wholeness Program,
the 90-day program –
this is a place where we went about exploring and revealing various aspects of life
which they had never thought was possible.
As we went by,
every time I ask a question and ask,
‘Yes or no?’
After some time they
some of them at least, their logic was completely defeated,
they said,
‘There’s no point Sadhguru
we saying yes, no, yes, no - no good.
We’re yes and yes.’
When I came one day they had written on a big board,
‘Sadhguru, Yes and Yes.’
So if you have realized there’s no value for your logic,
then
everything
doesn’t matter,
you don’t even have to do this
you don’t even have to say yes,
but when you still live by logic
whatever is said by whoever,
you have to push… put it to the test of your logic
because if you do not do that,
your logic will not evolve.
Logic is a horrible thing if it is in a rudimentary condition.
If you refine your logic,
it can be the way to your liberation.
It can be a stepping stone to your liberation
if you refine it.
If it's in a rudimentary condition
it is a horrible thing,
it blocks you from everything,
it makes you suspicious about everything.
It will not let you experience anything.
So
you’ve not given up your logic, have you?
You’re not listening, that’s why.
If you live your materialistic life like you’re going to live forever,
what will you do?
You will buy 1,673 pairs of shoes.
I went to somebody’s house in United States and I was sitting in their house
and then I needed to use the bathroom.
So I went and opened the door
thinking that is the bathroom.
I opened, it was a large room about let's say,
one segment of this hall like this
and it was full of shoes
hundreds of pairs of shoes.
I looked,
‘Are they in some kind of shoe business?’
Then I came out
and the lady of the house was trying to guide me to the bathroom.
Then I asked, ‘What are all those shoes?’
She said, ‘No…’
Not two dozens, hundreds of shoes.
‘I am buying shoes for twelve lifetimes,
I bought and kept, just in case when I come back,
if the shoe price is high in my next life, you know,
I have already bought them and kept.
So you don’t live your materialistic life like you’re going to live for ever.
You live your materialistic life like today is the last day.
You live your spiritual life like you’re eternal.
So without listening,
without applying your logic, don’t say ‘Yes,’
unless you become just yes and yes.
(Sadhguru): Whatever the experience of life
whether it's light or sound,
a taste, a smell or sensation,
whatever the form of experience
of pain or pleasure,
every experience that you have
is essentially conducted through your spine.
If spine is taken away
or
what passes through the spine is in some way
dislocated
there will be no experience.
We have always symbolized the spine
as the axis of the universe
because
essentially you know the universe
only from the context of your experience.
There is no other way to know it.
You do not know anything in this world
without the context of your experience.
Yes?
You understand what I am saying?
It's only by what's happening within you, you know
or you think you know.
Because you know the existence only by the context of your experience
and the basis of your experience is
what is being conducted through your spine right now,
spine is seen as the axis of the universe.
Today we know
that the whole solar system is such a small blob in this cosmos.
Tomorrow morning if this whole solar system evaporates
there will be no great vacuum,
just one little empty space.
The rest of the cosmos will not even notice it.
That’s how insignificant it is.
So
in yoga
they went to a different dimension and said,
‘Your spine is the axis of the universe.’
They are not saying this
because they believe that you are in the center of the universe;
because you are capable of knowing the universe
only from the context of your experience
and the basis of your experience is in your spine.
If any individual has to truly determine
the nature of his experience on this planet 100%
then having a little bit of mastery over the spine becomes essential.
Only that one
who anyway determines the nature of his experience
would dare to explore the full potential of his life
because he wouldn’t hesitate to step into anything.
If your experience is determined by anything other than yourself
naturally you will try to avoid a few things
and go after a few things.
Whatever you consider
as those which instigate or stimulate pleasant experiences
you go after that.
Whatever you think will create unpleasant experiences
you will go away from that.
Once this division happens in your consciousness
that you divide the existence into two
knowing the ultimate unity becomes unnecessarily difficult.
Why so much stress on joy, love, blissfulness
is simply because of this
so that your experience is not determined by something else.
Once if you sit here and you think
this tree creates pleasant experience for you
and that tree creates unpleasant experience for you,
naturally you will never step in that direction;
you will only hang around here.
That’s what is happening right now.
That’s what's happening with every aspect of life.
So once you divide the world
people who have been telling you silly things
that you should love your enemies -
I don't know
why you have to make your life so hard.
First make… enemy out of somebody
and then try to love him.
It's very difficult.
Isn't it very difficult?
If you don’t make him your enemy it would be easy.
You make him your enemy and then you try to love him
this’s an impossible condition.
No?
They always want to set impossible things for you
so that you’ll constantly go there.
Let's look at the possibilities.
Unless you do not divide the world
it's very difficult to embrace the world, isn't it?
In your consciousness
if you divide that this is mine, this is not mine
then trying to grab everything is very difficult.
Either everything is mine or nothing is mine;
this is okay.
Nothing is mine,
this is one way; it is okay.
Or everything is mine, this is okay;
it’ll work.
These are workable solutions.
‘You are my enemy but I love you’
this is very very difficult.
It’s a torture.
And the fundamental for dividing the world is
somewhere one entity causes pleasantness,
another entity causes unpleasantness within you;
that’s why you divide the world, isn't it?
It is essentially a survival mode.
You know if you go here it’ll be unpleasantness;
you know if you go there it’ll be pleasantness.
So slowly you start going there, there, there not here;
and after some time
you cannot go there at all
because you know the level of unpleasantness that happens within you.
Only if you are determining the nature of your experience
you can keep it pleasant within yourself
no matter where you are.
If people cause unpleasantness
they can do it only around you,
never within you.
Once this freedom is there
its only then you can truly be inclusive otherwise you get stuck.
Every little sound that you hear,
see if you can conduct it through your spine.
Everything that you see, see if you can conduct it through your spine.
Right now I’m speaking,
the sound itself is not flowing through this wire
but in the form of electrical impulse
it is going through this wire
to the speakers and then bhoom!
If I cut this
that’s not going to work,
this’s not going to work.
Spine is just like this.
Spine itself doesn’t know anything
but it is conducting everything.
Only the one who understands that
all this bunch of wires out there
can manage this sound properly
how it should be...
We have been having some trouble, you know,
because too many wires.
Only if you understand every wire that’s out there
you can manage the sound just the way you want it
otherwise in between so many things will happen.
The same with this one.
If you have a little mastery over
how it’s being conducted
then you can ensure
what kind of experience you’re producing for yourself;
otherwise everything becomes accidental.
Once the very experience of your life is happening accidentally,
once your very way of being is accidental
if you are existing here accidentally
then that’s like being a potential calamity, you know.
Just the fear
‘what will happen to me,
what will happen to me’
destroys everything.
The beauty and the gracefulness of being human will be completely lost
once the fear of ‘what will happen’ is there in my mind.
You can
you know animals are doing quite fine;
lot of …the temptation,
any number of philosophers have gone into the forest,
watched the quite gentle
can't say gentle,
the quiet natural life that animals are having.
People have been hugely drawn into it
and they have tried to move into the forest
and live just like them, simple.
This draw is big time because of the chaos of human societies
but what you need to understand is
it's never going to work
because the sense of peacefulness
that an animal has
is coming from a certain level of unawareness,
a certain level of unconsciousness.
You cannot fall back there,
do what you want.
Do what you want you cannot fall back into the unconscious nature of an animal.
Nature has pushed you on into this level of consciousness;
you try as hard as you want.
You can try hard and become conscious;
you cannot try hard and become unconscious,
please see this.
At least this much nature has taken care for you
that you can only move forward not backwards.
Philosophers and others,
various types of people have tried to live
as simply as animals live
hoping that life will become okay
but it’s not worked.
It is not the complexity of external situation which is doing this.
It is just that
we are not determining the nature of our experience within ourselves.
Questioner: All the cultures in the world
they have a common thing that they revere human life.
Taking away your own life or somebody else’s life
is not considered proper
but if… if one is really suffering,
one has got a bad deal in this life
then why can't just one, you know,
start a new game,
end this one and restart the game?
Is there anything wrong with that?
Sadhguru: So ‘if I have a bad deal
don’t I have the right
to shut it up
and come back again?’
If you have a bad deal with your job
you could just quit.
If you have a bad deal with your marriage you could just divorce.
If you have a bad deal with the society in which you live
you can come to Isha Yoga Center.
If you have a bad deal in Isha Yoga Center
you can go up the mountain.
So these are not good enough reasons
for you to end the process of life.
First of all you didn’t create it.
So you don’t talk about ending it.
Unless
your identity as a separate being
or a separate person has
has disappeared
and you and the source of creation are just the same
if you come to that point
then you can just throw away your body consciously.
Then you are allowed to do it,
not by damaging the body,
not by hanging from a tree.
We don’t mind burying you under the tree
but hanging from a tree is neither good for you
nor for the tree
We already looked at this;
whether it's a good deal or a bad deal
if you have a larger purpose
everything is a stepping stone.
Everything is a stepping stone for your ultimate well-being
if you have set the larger goal.
Every situation that you get into
you are getting so identified and caught up with it,
now it feels like it's better to end your life.
Anyway, this is lot of bull
‘cause today if something is going wrong
you want to end your life;
tomorrow morning something is going right you want to live;
you want to have your third baby.
You want to get married once again.
If things are going little better tomorrow morning
you will have plans.
Everything looks bleak - you think of suicide, isn't it?
So this is just a game that you are playing in your mind.
It once happened,
a salesman decided to go into a new development;
housing development.
He thought no other salesmen would have still ventured yet
because it's a new development.
So he wanted to be the first one;
be the early bird.
So he went and knocked on the very first house
that he saw there.
A lady came and opened the door.
Without giving her a chance
he just slipped into her house,
took a lot of cow dung,
fresh cow dung from his bag
and threw it all over the new carpet
and he said,
‘See, I have a wonder vacuum cleaner.
You watch it;
I’ll clean this carpet
without even leaving the slightest of odour.
If I don’t do it
I will eat every piece of this cow dung myself,
I will eat it.’
So the lady asked,
‘Would you like some tomato sauce
because we still do not have electricity in the house.’
What you need is a little bit of tomato sauce.
Tastes a little good
then you suddenly want to live.
Just eating cow dung you feel like dying.
You stood up and said, ‘Sadhguru…’
If you know what you’re uttering,
such nonsense should not come out of your mouth.
There is no meaning to Sadhguru
when you are wanting to end your life
because it's not worthwhile sitting here -
that’s what you are telling me,
isn't it?
It’s not worthwhile sitting here;
you are not in grace;
you are somewhere
about how your job is not working,
how your family is freaking you,
how something else is happening;
that's all you are thinking about.
Just be here;
suddenly it’ll be worthwhile.
I’ll make it worthwhile.
Sadhguru: yoga is essentially understanding
aligning your system with the cosmic geometry.
See in the yogic system,
we see the body as one hundred and fourteen chakras,
seventy two thousand nadis
meeting in hundred and fourteen junctions
which are called as chakras.
Out of these
two are outside your body,
one hundred and twelve inside the body.
Of these one hundred and twelve,
there are four about which you don’t have to do anything.
They are like that.
If other things work, they will flower by themselves.
So there are only one hundred and eight with which you can work.
So, hundred and eight has become significant.
If you wear any beads,
people wear hundred and eight beads.
If they say a mantra,
hundred and eight
because these are the hundred and eight chakras
that you need to work with.
This hundred and eight number is significant
and you will see it in the East,
everything is hundred and eight because
the diameter of the sun
and the distance between the earth and the sun
is hundred and eight times.
The diameter of the moon
and the distance between the moon and the earth is
hundred and eight times.
The diameter of the earth and the diameter of the Sun
is hundred and eight times.
And in this body,
there are one hundred and eight chakras
that we can work upon.
So the cosmic geometry
I can go into a lot of arithmetic
which will match with your human system
and these things we have been conscious of
and that is how we came up with eighty four basic asanas.
Out of these eighty four,
if you do twenty one of them properly
and you just master one,
your system will be aligned with the cosmic system.
Once it’s aligned,
everything that you need to know about the cosmos is right here.
Shekhar Kapur: I’m very fascinated by what you
because there’s a lot of construction going on here.
It’s almost like, you know, there’s a
Sadhguru: A whole humanity is in construction. (Laughs)
Shekhar Kapur: Okay. Alright. I’ll buy that. I’ll buy that.
So, Sadhguru, this is a temple that,
I know you told me that, it will last thousands of years, and there
it’s a feminine temple.
It’s a temple devoted to the female aspect, not only of us, but the whole existence,
the feminine aspect of existence.
So, tell me about this. This is not man, woman. What is it?
Sadhguru: What is feminine? What is masculine?
See, you need to understand this.
Human understanding comes from a certain perception,
a limited perception.
When I say a limited perception, right now,
your whole perception comes through your sense perception.
Sense organs can perceive something only if there is something to compare with.
for example right now… you know silence only because there is sound.
And you know sound only because there’s silence, isn't it?
See right now, if I show you this part of my hand, (Gestures) you can only see this.
You cannot see this. (Gestures)
If I show you this, (Gestures) you can only see this.
So, this is the nature of sense perception.
Whether it’s your eyes or your ears or your smell or your taste or your touch,
everything is only by comparison.
So, the moment you perceive through sense organs,
you already divided the existence.
So, because of the division, your mind also thinks in divisions.
Because without divisions you cannot perceive,
without two there is no logic, so you need two.
So, these two fundamental principles,
because we are human, we are a species with man - woman,
masculine - feminine,
we are calling them masculine and feminine,
So, in this culture, they… it may be referred to as Shiva, Shakti,
or in other cultures, Yin and Yang, whatever.
Shekhar Kapur: So, Shiva being masculine and Shakti being feminine.
Sadhguru: Yes. Yes.
Shekhar Kapur: Why Shakti? Shakti means power.
Why is that feminine? You would expect
Sadhguru: Not power, Shakti means energy.
Shekhar Kapur: Energy, okay.
Sadhguru: It’s energy. Unfortunately, because of various, you know,
civilizational and exploitative situations in the human societies,
we are thinking of energy as power and power and dominance.
No, energy is just energy.
Without energy nothing happens.
Shekhar Kapur: So, I could say this temple is… is a temple for energy.
Sadhguru: Feminine energy.
Shekhar Kapur: Feminine energy.
So, let’s go in and tell me what feminine energy is,
as against masculine energy.
Is this what you call as leap of fate
alright from intellectualism to consciousness there is one big leap
Sadhguru: It doesn't take any fate it just needs a leg
Shekar kapur: or a broken leg okay
Sadhguru: When we say a temple, this must be understood.
The temple is like a body, to energize the system.
Temple is not a place of worship.
Temple is not a place where you go and make appeals to some unknown God up there.
This is not that kind.
This is not a place where you lead a prayer.
That is the uniqueness of this culture.
Here, temple is like a body, energized in a certain way.
Now, if you see the masculine temple that we have is circular,
circular in nature because that is the quality that it is.
The feminine temple is in the form of a triangle.
There’s a whole lot of things in its geometry,
how it is made.
See, all the wings are 33 feet, properly done. in the multiples of 11.
It is made in a certain way to create a feminine energy there.
Why 33?
If you go into these details, there’s enormous amount of science behind that.
Like your spinal column is 33 aspects, and
Shekhar Kapur: Which I just risked right now, (Sadhguru Laughs) because… okay.
Sadhguru: So, there are so many aspects to this, which I don’t wish to go right now,
but essentially, it is feminine energy.
Where was the need for this, in a way?
See, one thing is today,
the feminine is at huge risk on the planet.
So, immediately, people may think,
‘Oh, that’s because of the man.’
Maybe man instigated it,
but when I say masculine and feminine,
I’m not talking about male, female.
I’m talking about those two aspects,
those two dimensions of life, without which,
our life will not be beautiful;
our life cannot work actually, even in the most fundamental way.
So, because people start thinking in terms of dominance,
this is a problem.
If you’re not looking at life as dominance,
if you’re looking at life as integration,
if you’re looking at life as cooperation,
if you’re looking at life as oneness,
then without these two dimensions, there is no existence.
But unfortunately, societies have taken on to this,
as to who is dominating right now,
whether masculine or feminine
If any one of them dominates, it’ll turn ugly.
It is not that if masculine dominates it will turn ugly or
feminine dominates it will turn ugly.
If any one of them dominates it will turn ugly.
Above all, if you start thinking in terms of dominance,
your life will turn ugly.
By domination, you will not know life.
Only by inclusion, you will know life.
So, this is essentially to create an energy force
where people can experience a powerful sense of feminine,
a fiery nature of the feminine thing.
See, feminine is a very fiery form of energy.
But today, because we have made economics the most important aspect of human societies,
naturally
see, we need to understand this,
economics is being glorified as if it’s some kind of a divine thing;
economics (Laughs) essentially means survival,
survival process.
Economics has a place in our life for sure,
but it is not the be all of life.
So, feminine doesn’t belong to that dimension.
If, in these societies
love, art, music, above all, aesthetics of life, was dominant in a society,
if aesthetics was as important as economics,
nobody had to bring up the feminine,
feminine would be naturally exuberantly alive and manifest in the society.
Today, either we have
we are slowly making all the women like men,
because they have to survive, they have to earn money,
they have to provide;
or a small percentage of them, in reaction,
not being able to cope with that, they’re becoming like Barbie dolls.
Here we are creating a woman who is fiery and powerful in a completely different way.
Shekhar Kapur: But what you're saying is,
you just said love, art, aesthetics,
you used those three words as part of the feminine energy.
Now, I’m a filmmaker.
I’d like to assume that I have all three in myself, so that’s my feminine energy.
Sadhguru: Yes, it is.
Shekhar Kapur: Yes. So, what else…..
Sadhguru: If you do not have the feminine,
you won’t look in… think in terms of what’s beautiful, what’s not beautiful.
You’ll only think in terms of what’s useful and what’s not useful.
You will become utilitarian.
The masculine is like that.
Shekhar Kapur: So that’s, so I’m
Sadhguru: So, you being a man or a woman has nothing to do with it.
Shekhar Kapur: So, am I in conflict constantly between my masculine and feminine self.
Sadhguru: Why… see, that’s the whole thing.
These two energies are the basis of creation,
why would they be in conflict?
They’re in absolute collaboration.
It is only in human mind that it’s in conflict.
In life, it’s not in conflict.
In energy, it’s not in conflict.
Only in… in mind it’s in conflict because mind divides.
Shekhar Kapur: Because to people who were listening to you say
the sheer, absolute power of the feminine energy, they don’t relate to that the
they … see feminine energy is something gentle, nurturing, soft.
Sadhguru: No, no, no.
Shekhar Kapur: Tell me about the power of feminine energy
Sadhguru: See
Shekhar Kapur: …because a lot of our culture talks about various goddesses
that have a sense of huge power and almost violent power.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) See, the original Goddesses that we created in this culture were all Kali,
Bhairavi,
now she’s Bhairavi; all fierce, powerful creatures, okay?
Somewhere down the line when the outside influences came upon the culture
and people made fun of them,
people ridiculed ‘Your women are like this?’ (Laughs)
Then they tried to domesticate the feminine.
And then they created Saraswati, Lakshmi, very soft, gentle, housewife kind of feminine.
Bhairavi, you can’t contain her to the limitations of your
not that she’s… she cannot stay in your house;
you cannot contain her to the boundaries of your house.
She’s… she is all-encompassing.
That’s the nature of her.
That’s the nature of the feminine, that it’s all-embracing,
not all-conquering, you must understand.
Man wants to be in conquest.
A woman wants to embrace.
By conquest, you will never have it.
By embrace, you will have it, isn't it?
Sadhguru: Yes. See now, now it’s come to a point where the work has become almost feminine. Okay?
You have… you need gentle hands to do what they’re doing.
But before that, this rock was in the quarry, okay?
There you needed some hard tools to cut it, make it a big piece,
transport it on the truck, bring it in, hold it there,
cut it down to size.
All that was very masculine.
If that masculine work had not happened,
this feminine part would be not possible.
This is so in the society also, I want you to see.
If the man goes about, breaks down nature, builds his home and all this,
then the woman comes in and makes it beautiful.
If she didn’t come in, he would just have a rock house which is of (Laughs) no consequence.
Nobody enjoys being there.
They’ll have a house, and they’ll live outdoor.
It’s happening in cultures where feminine has been suppressed.
They have great homes, but they always want to be outdoors. (Both Laugh)
Shekhar Kapur: it’s a good place to talk about what consecration means.
What does consecration mean? (Sadhguru Laughs) What do you consecrate?
I mean, what is that… what is that process and what does it achieve?
Sadhguru: See, this is happening everywhere around you all the time.
One form of existence, or one form of energy,
is transforming itself into another.
What is mud is becoming flower, fruit and food, isn't it?
What is filth is actually becoming a flower.
What is stink is becoming fragrance.
It’s happening.
If you eat the food, this food becomes,
from what was just a grain of rice, becomes such a sophisticated machinery like human body.
So, if you make mud into food, you call it agriculture.
If you make food into this, (Ref to body) you call it digestion.
If we make this into mud, usually we call it cremation, (Both Laugh) or burial and whatever.
So, if you can make a stone or some other gross substance,
a material substance, into a divine reverberance,
into highest, subtlest possible reverberance,
that’s called consecration.
So, the whole existence is doing it all the time in different levels.
So, this is a certain science and a technology through which
you transform the grosser elements into finer elements.
Unfortunately, this was always mistaken as producing gold.
The alchemy of the West is always talking about producing gold.
Gold has no worth except in the market, okay?
It’s only greed which makes a man go towards gold.
The Indian alchemy never talked about making gold.
Indian alchemy always talked about making grosser elements into finer substances,
making a stone into the divine.
So, the whole Indian alchemy is like a consecration process.
Sadhguru: See, right now, there is an agricultural science, right?
Shekhar Kapur: Yeah.
Sadhguru: They will teach you how to study the soil,
the qualities of the soil, the seed, the manure, everything.
So, they only set those conditions,
They will set the soil conditions;
they’ll set the seed condition;
everything else that’s necessary to grow.
But the growth itself, the transforming earth into food,
that, no scientist does.
That is happening by nature.
Here also, the same thing. We have a whole science.
If we set all these conditions, the gross becomes subtle.
So, when I was building something,
and this was my first project. I’m building a farm in… near Mysore,
and I’m doing it with a real short shoe string.
So when I wanna, in… in the end, I wanna paint it.
And I don’t have the thing to get painters to paint this large wall surface.
So, I want to paint it, and it takes too much time to go like this; (Gestures)
so what I do, I dip, hold it here (Gestures) and just walk.
One smear of paint (Laughs) from this end to that end, that end to this end.
The first smear that I did, I dipped and walked like this. (Gestures)
Here, the smear was thick. As it went, it became lighter, lighter, lighter, lighter and became really subtle.
I just looked at this and I burst into tears.
That was one great moment of realization for me.
This is the whole creation.
From a rock to divine, this is all the thing is.
It’s either dense or it’s subtle.
That’s all it is. It’s the same existence everywhere.
Whether you look at the Earth or you look at your body or you look at what you call as Divine,
it is all the same substance.
It is just getting subtler.
And whatever we are creating as divine is just that -
making a rock into a subtler form of energy.
Every substance on the planet is exuding a certain kind of energy,
reverberation, which is a scientific fact.
You can change the way it exudes,
what type of energy it exudes, you can change that.
Altering that to a very subtle and useful form of energy is consecration process.
So, temples were energy forms,
temples were energy places where every day in the morning,
before you start your day, you go sit there for some time,
imbibe this energy and go into the world.
Why this became necessary is,
see, once you step into the world, for a ordinary person, a common man,
every transaction in the world, whatever it may be,
what is your profit is somebody’s loss;
what is somebody’s profit is your loss.
whether it’s family transaction, between husband and wife,
father and son,
business partners or every transaction
there’s something to give, something to take everywhere.
That’s why it’s a transaction.
So, if you’re not sufficiently lubricated in your
the way you are,
every transaction is a point of friction, a possible friction.
There are some people who are making every (Laughs) transaction into a friction.
Some people are conducting their transactions gracefully.
So, everyday going sitting in the temple was just this -
you already well lubricated;
when you step out you can pass through the world with least amount of friction.
So, this is a very very significant instruction which is still alive in the southern part of this country.
Here, nobody tells you if you go to the temple,
you should pray.
They always tell you if you go there, you must sit there;
you must sit there for some time and come.
But today, the instruction has become like this,
the way they are following it is, they touch their bottom to the floor,
and they go.
Nobody told you, you have to pray.
Nobody told you, you have to make a offering.
You just have to sit there.
But they also told that people on the spiritual path need not go to the temple.
Because they have self-charging mechanisms.
So, temple is essentially for a householder
who has no his own way of transforming his own energies -
Use a public place; a battery charging place it is.
So, this is feminine energy;
it’s triangular.
That’s… whole temple is triangular,
it's an equilateral triangle okay?
There are many aspects of the geometry which I don't want to go in
but the significant aspect is
another triangle fitting into this in a smaller capacity..
so a downward triangle is
this downward triangle
always symbolizes the feminine.
The upward moving triangle symbolizes the masculine.
but here normally it would be depicted like this.
Okay, this is also the Star of David and whatever else,
the star is used, and this is the basic yanta for Shri Chakra and everything.
This is the masculine and feminine meeting.
But here, the masculine is held inside the feminine triangle,
because here, the masculine is unborn.
It’s in the womb of the feminine.
So, it’s a smaller triangle held inside.
It is not a larger triangle like a male meeting the female.
This is like in the womb.
The masculine is a child in the feminine’s womb
because here the feminine is in a dominant form.
So, those… there’s a whole geometry of things into, in this,
where we are trying to build a body of the feminine
to energize it in a certain way.
So, Devi will sit here.
This is also a triangle,
and this is into the Earth.
Here, there are steps going in.
Being in the Earth is very important for the feminine.
So, the deity herself is going into the Earth,
and people have to go in to meet her.
That’s how it is.
And there are lots of symbolisms attached and geometry involved in this whole process.
In the end, today you have walked in,
it’s like a construction site.
After two months, you walk into this space,
forget about the ambience,
walk with your eyes closed,
you will see it’ll just hit you in your face,
the whole energy of it. That’s how it will be.
Sadhguru: I happened to be in Tel Aviv.
I was supposed to speak to a group of people
and
I was to arrive there at noon time and address them
but because of some delays in the flight,
I landed at six o’clock.
Six-thirty is my talk.
This is thirty years of Isha;
in these thirty years, I’ve not been late
to a single appointment till now.
So, I didn’t want to break that.
So, from the airport, I went straight.
So I discovered when I went there,
I was to speak in a restaurant.
You eat in a restaurant.
Some restaurants are famous for food,
some are famous for the ambience that they set,
but some are famous
for the conversations that happen in the restaurant.
So, it seems in Tel Aviv,
the most intelligent conversations happened in this restaurant
and not in the parliament.
I went there. People were greeting me
and one man came and said ‘Shalom.’
I said, ‘What does that mean?’
He said, ‘This means
This is the highest way of greeting.’
I said, ‘That is your opinion, but what does it mean?’
He said,
‘It means peace, this is the highest way of greeting.’
I said,
‘Why would peace be the highest way of greeting
unless you are born in Middle East?’
In South India,
if somebody comes up to me in the morning
and says ‘Peace’,
I’ll ask him, ‘What’s wrong with you?’
Whatever you’re deprived of becomes the highest thing.
If you are deprived of food, that becomes the highest thing.
If you are deprived of love, that becomes the highest thing.
If all these things are taken care of,
one thing that a human being will always long for
is to be free from everything.
To be free essentially means,
to move from a compulsive nature of existence
to a conscious nature of existence.
This is what is needed right now in our country as a nation.
We evolved a system as to
how to develop an individual human being.
We never evolved a system as to how to develop a society.
This system we called as ‘samskriti’.
Today, this word is being dismissed as culture.
It is not culture,
‘sam’ means equanimous,
‘kriti’ means ‘to do’;
to do life in an equanimous manner.
Another meaning for ‘sam’ is exuberance.
Another meaning for ‘sam’ is well;
to do your life in an equanimous way
in an exuberant way and doing it well.
If you do this,
everything around you will be okay.
Today, we’re trying to impose moral codes upon our society.
You need to understand,
India is a society without morality
because we always relied on stirring up our humanity
rather than depending upon the morality.
The morality of one person
is an obscenity for another person.
So, we’ve always had means and ways and tools
as to how to stir up the humanity within us
and that humanity has been the basis of this nation.
It is that fundamental human longing to become free
which has been the main thread,
which is holding all these multiple cultures together
as one nation.
Though we, you know, we are being
it is being propagated like India was born in 1947,
no
The other cultures everywhere in the world experience this as one nation
for thousands of years.
Even though there were many political entities,
many times over hundred entities
in spite of that, people saw it as Bharat,
because they saw these unique people
who did not believe in anything particular,
who had no moral sense
but they were perfectly on the track
because they were not a bundle of morality
but an effervescent humanity.
This has to be brought back into India because
when you are a seeker,
you are not in collision with anybody.
When you are a seeker,
there is a certain humility about you
because you have not assumed anything.
You can become a seeker
only when you realize the immensity of ‘I do not know.’
If you realize the immensity
that you do not know so many things about the existence
With so much science and technology,
we still cannot figure one single atom in its entirety
that is the reality of our existence.
Sadhguru: In general
sciences are understood only as physical sciences,
which is a very gross way to live.
See, the physical science has no answer for life.
Physical science and technology can only bring comfort and convenience to your life.
It cannot solve your life situations.
Western societies are enough proof of this. Isn’t it so?
Yes?
They do not solve any problem of humanity.
They bring much more comfort and convenience to our life.
Definitely because of science and technology we are the most comfortable generation ever on the planet. Isn’t it so?
So, when we say sciences,
let’s understand sciences are also of esoteric nature.
Sciences are not just physical,
but today only physical sciences are being promoted as science.
About are other dimensions of sciences, are they coming back?
My whole work has been just to strive this,
strive for this.
We are bringing this inner science into people’s lives.
It’s made sufficient impact but not enough
because the problem that exists in the world is too big.
It needs much, much, much more work to make it happen.
It has definitely done something.
The sciences have been brought back,
at least in some minimal way to common people as they understand it.
Even in rural villages in Tamil Nad, we have done this in 1350 villages right now,
and you see there is a change in the way they are looking at their life.
They are making some effort to change their living conditions
which they thought is God ordained.
All these years, they believed this is God’s will, this is how we are.
Now, they are making some effort to change
which is the only way life can change.
There is no overnight solution.
If we work at it, if our whole life if we work at it,
if we leave 10% change,
it’s a tremendous thing
because social realities cannot be changed like this.
People have tried to change it through violent methods.
All you will do is you will replace one tyrant with many.
That’s all that will happen in the name of revolutions.
So, right now we have set forth a revolution,
we call this
‘Silent Revolution of Self Realization.’
Is there a banner?
No.
Whenever we talk about revolution,
most of the time people are talking about changing somebody, isn’t it? –
All the time rather.
See, you wanting somebody else to change is not a revolution.
This is an age old problem.
Mother-in-law wants the daughter-in-law to change;
daughter-in-law wants the mother-in-law to change,
isn’t this an age old problem?
Is there a revolution in it?
What is revolutionary about it?
You want somebody else to change –
there is no revolution about it.
‘I am willing to change’ this is a revolution.
This will bring about genuine change in the world.
That
‘I am willing to change my ways to make things happen’ –
this will bring about the change.
So, this is the Silent Revolution,
and it’s a science as to how to change yourself.
Sadhguru: Devotion means
a tool to demolish yourself,
a tool to destroy
your intentions,
your visions,
your dreams,
so that
you become
not a tiny little creature,
so that you become
a nameless little creature in this cosmos
but you become the very hand of the Divine.
Devotion is not a deal that you make.
Too much deal making is happening in the name of devotion.
Deal makers and devotees are two different people.
One belongs to the market place;
another belongs to the Divine.
They are two different worlds altogether.
You need to understand this,
the moment you sit down to make a deal
it is the dharma of a deal,
that you should do your best to be smarter than the other.
No?
You don’t want to make a dumb deal, do you want to?
When you sit down to make a deal,
you want to be smarter than the other.
If you take this attitude with the Divine
you have lost before you start.
You sit with the Existence like this,
you sit with your Guru like this,
you lost even before you started,
you don’t have to run the race,
you anyway lost.
You cannot win,
because the very fundamental purpose has been defeated,
and now what?
So don’t lose out on the tremendous power of devotion,
because you have a stupid deal in your head.
What can you ask?
What kind of deal can you make with the creation and the Creator?
Only a dumb deal
because, you do not know
what possibility the cosmos holds.
You only know the little nonsense that you have experienced in your life.
If, if, if, if
you are in touch with an energy,
at least you are in the presence of an energy,
which is the source of creation,
and you ask,
‘I want to get a job,
I want to get married,’
how stupid can you get?
You don’t know what it holds.
Isn't it best,
‘Do whatever you want with me,’
hmm?
If you’ve found contact,
isn't it best to leave it to the source of creation,
‘Do whatever you want with me’?
No, no get me a job
I want in
I want increment
I want promotion.
Oh my God,
don’t do that to yourself.
If at any time you find yourself in the presence of something
which seems to be larger than you, in some context,
that’s a time, you don’t try to make a deal.
Just shut up and be.
Just see how you can receive,
so that’s devotion.
That you understand
becoming the hand of the Divine
is a far bigger possibility
than making a deal,
however big the deal seems to be in your head.
deals and deals always going on.
Everywhere,
with life and death,
deals are going on.
From deals to devotion, is a transformation.
It is like,
‘If I give you filth,
will you give me something fragrant and wonderful?’
No!
If I give you filth,
you will want to give me more filth,
but please see how the creation functions.
If you give this tree filth, it’ll give you flowers,
isn’t it?
This is the way of the Divine.
If you become,
if you really become a devotee,
you become the hand of the Divine,
and that’s how it will be.
Whatever is thrown at you is nourishing.
Whatever comes your way is wonderful for you,
because whatever comes
you know how to transform it into something beautiful.
That’s devotion.
Deal means,
you want to get the flowers,
you want to give the filth to somebody else.
If you do that deal,
after that
you will get excluded, isn't it?
You will get excluded from any group of people,
or ultimately you will get excluded from
the way the creation is happening.
When we say yoga,
we are talking about a union.
A union means that you don’t exist here as a creature by yourself.
You exist here as part of the divine.
You exist here as part of the creation and the Creator,
that you become one with everything.
That you are not one little crawly creature
who goes around doing its own thing,
but the whole idea, the juvenile idea of freedom is
that you want to do your own thing, isn't it?
A wrong idea,
a wrong attitude
a wrong emotion,
can cause much much more damage than poison.
So this is why
Asatoma Sadgamaya, Asatoma
‘Sadhguru, already I said it,’
‘No no no, you must tell it every moment of your life.’
Every moment of your life this is the journey
that you’re moving from untruth to truth.
Otherwise,
what is not true can be made to look true in your mind.
Once you make untruth into truth in your mind then,
that untruth will poison the very way you exist.
Then you wonder
why suffering is coming in search of you.
Well it's bound to.
How else will it -
if it doesn’t come,
that means my life has failed.
Suffering must come,
if you’re doing the wrong things, isn't it?
Someone very carefully went up the tree,
another fool tried to run up and fell down.
If nothing happens to him,
the one who has the skill to climb up is a fool, isn't it?
Yes or no?
No?
It is so, isn't it?
One who has paid attention,
one who has taken care to acquire the necessary skill
to do something in a proper way,
if him and a fool who has not paid any attention to anything,
happens the same way,
then the man who paid attention to all these things is a fool, isn't it?
So I am not really against suffering.
It's my wish that you should not suffer,
but if you’re stupid
and you want to do idiotic things to yourself
you must suffer,
because only if suffering comes you will stop doing stupid things.
Suppose
do you see suppose, you have a wound which is drying up,
you want to...
If it goes deep enough, when it hurts,
you stop.
Suppose it did not hurt,
you would pull out your intestines.
Yes?
Do not underestimate yourself.
If there was really no pain in your body,
as you sit in the sathsang,
you know like how you blow chewing gum,
you blow your lungs out,
to show me how big a lungs you’ve got.
Yes you would do.
Don’t… do not underestimate yourself,
do not underestimate your own stupidity.
If somebody is doing something else to make your impression,
you’ll take your intestines and
because if you as much as touch it with a pin,
it hurts so badly.
Wherever you do not know the pain,
you do not know the pain of a tree,
you do not know the pain of an animal,
you do not know the pain of other things,
all those things you’re
chopping, chopping, chopping, isn't it?
Only this one you know, so you’re preserving.
So it is fine, you’re doing good.
At least you know this much.
It just has to expand, that’s all.
Now because you know the pain of what this is,
you’re keeping this well.
If you just begin to feel the pain of the mountain,
you would keep the mountain well.
If you understand the pain of the cosmos,
you would keep everything well, isn't it?
That is what yoga means
union,
that everything has become a part of you,
and devotion is that dimension,
which will obliterate the boundaries,
between what is you and what is not you very effortlessly.
Speaker: The question is how can we translate Gita,
the philosophy of Krishna,
into augmenting business in India?
Sadhguru: I… I have not read the Gita, so
I really have not.
I’m sorry,
because,
for me
my own vision has never failed me.
So I always kept away from all scriptures
because I didn’t want to clutter myself with something or the other.
The only thing that I learnt and I continue to do is,
if I look at something
if I look at a person,
I know their past, present and future.
That is the level of attention I’m paying to them.
I don’t look at like this,
when I look I look at it completely with all that I have.
If you pay enough attention
there is nothing that will not yield.
So I never had any reason or need
to go looking for scriptures or something.
With all
with all respect and regard for them,
it is not that I am averse to it;
it's just that I have not had the time.
How this whole process started is,
when I was very young I realized that I just don't know anything.
See, if you realize that you do not know,
if it's a full-scale realization that you do not know anything,
paying attention will be natural.
Because you know everything –
ah, you know this guy, you know this, this, this, this, this;
there’re assumptions and assumptions and assumptions.
Well, I have used it in a different way
but even if you’re doing business
even it's for business purposes
the only reason why one human being seems to be
all the opportunities seems to be going in his direction and not other people,
is simply because
he is able to see and other people are not able to see.
It's not that it's not there for others.
One is able to see and others are not able to see.
So essentially a leader means
that you are able to see something
that others are not able to see.
So attention without intention;
simply being attentive
that’s what we were trying to do in the afternoon;
not paying attention to something,
just practicing attention,
a very heightened level of attention
where
an unfocused attention
but when you focus it on something,
just about anything has to yield.
There is no other way to that attention.
So I always focused on enhancing and sharpening my attention,
never on retention
because what you gather is not you.
Essentially you know that you exist
only because you have some sense of attention right now, isn't it?
Suppose you fall asleep and you lose your attention,
you do not even know that you exist.
So the basis of your existence itself is attention.
And this attention need not be mortgaged to anything.
You just have to sharpen the attention.
See, if you have a knife in your hands
there is no such thing that you have to cut only apples with this.
If you have a sharp enough knife,
you could cut anything that you want.
But the important thing is the knife is sharp enough.
So if your attention is keen enough
not for something or the other –
if your attention has become very keen;
if you wish to do a certain type of activity you can successfully do it.
I think I must say something about my own enterprises at one time.
My enterprise started when I was eight years of age.
Because of a strange kind of pride in me,
I wouldn’t
I never, ever took a single rupee as a pocket money from my parents.
I started making money when I was six, seven years of age.
By eight I was quite an accomplished entrepreneur.
Simple things
even today I’m known in Mysore
because I caught snakes in everybody’s houses.
If I caught a snake, they gave me twenty-five rupees.
In 1960s, twenty-five rupees is a million dollars for a seven-year old, eight-year old kind.
I was just on top of the world.
So there is a food research institute - CFTRI
every Saturday afternoon I went there.
I caught four, five snakes.
They measured it.
I have to show it to… like this.
If it's over three feet, I get fifty rupees.
Less than three feet, I get twenty-five rupees.
On an afternoon I would make hundred to hundred-and-fifty rupees.
I don't know if you can imagine –
hundred and fifty rupees for a eight, ten-year-old kid in 1960s or 70s
was like a million dollars today.
It was big and I went to so many things;
just about anything that came my way.
I should tell you a little enterprise that I did
which grow into… grew into a big business.
After my university
where I learned nothing-
but I passed
The only thing was by then I had crisscrossed India on my motorcycle
and I suddenly realized when I went to the borders of India,
they asked me for something other than my driving license.
I did not even know that there was a passport.
See, it's not like today.
Today every child may be three-year old, four-year-old kid knows
he has to have a passport;
I’m in my twenties
but I do not know that I need a passport.
I went to the border and then they said,
‘Where is your passport?’
I said, ‘What? I have a driving license.’
They said, ‘No, you need a passport.’
Then I turned back from Nepal border
and came back on my motorcycle.
So my only dream was I am going to just ride across the world.
So I wanted to do something.
I started kind of farming,
commercial farming.
I was making money.
I thought I will do for two years and leave.
But in the meantime my entrepreneurship took off in so many different ways.
Like this I went about
and then there was some
there was a industry coming up close-by;
they wanted to build a water treatment plant.
I happened to know the person who was running the industry.
I just went there and I wanted to meet him.
I was sitting in his office.
They were discussing something about a water treatment plant.
I just heard this and they were looking at the drawings and stuff.
Then I asked,
‘Can I apply,
can I do this?
Because it's close to my farm,
can I do this?’
He said, ‘No, no this is very complex.
There are some experts from Mumbai and Bangalore
who will come and do it.
You cannot do it.’
I said, ‘Give me a chance. Let me see.’
I took the file from him. I went and read through everything.
Then I went back to him after three days and said,
‘I can do this.’
He said, ‘Don’t you do this. You’re my friend.
I don’t want to do this.’
‘No, just let me give a… you know the tender.’
So I, you know,
those days there was something called as Nava Karnataka book stalls.
They were selling only the Russian books.
You used to get big literature books.
You can get Leo Tolstoy’s War &amp; Peace for two rupees
and engineering books for one rupee, two rupees –
all hard bound books.
I bought ten books about water treatment plant.
Sat down in my farm and poured through this day and night.
I made my own new design.
I went there
and I gave a tender for one point seven-six lakhs,
mind you this is seventies.
And the closest tender was thirty-two lakhs;
the highest tender was over sixty lakhs.
He looked at this and said,
‘You are funny.
You’re not going to do this.’
I said, ‘No, I can do it.’
He said, ‘No way you can do it.
Look at this, the nearest tender is thirty-two lakhs
and you’re saying one point seven-six lakhs.
How will you do it?’
I said, ‘Give me one more day.’
I went back again and poured through the books.
I said, ‘I’ll do it.’
Then he said, ‘It's ninety days you must finish this
and it must work.
If it doesn’t work, at your own cost you must remove it.
Clean the site and go and I will not give you a rupee of advance.’
I again went and poured through the books.
I said, ‘I can do it.’
I completed this in a… little over seventy days.
I did this in ninety plus thousand rupees.
In one shot I made eighty thousand rupees just like that.
People thought this is a hit.
There my construction industry started.
Raja Ramanna was coming for RMP plant.
He is just coming in a helicopter to see where the site is.
There is no, anybody there.
I just went and met this engineer.
He says he was breaking his head,
‘I don't know what to do,
I have to mark the site.’
I said, ‘I have got pegs and white cloth.
I will just go and mark the site for you.’
I marked it.
They paid me thirty-eight thousand rupees for a fifteen minute job.
I went on my motorcycle and just fixed it myself.
Like this my enterprise started and we grew into a major construction company.
We were going very big
but then I got enlightened.
So I gave up.
Speaker: Thank you… thank you Sadhguru for sharing that story.
Thank you professor.
We’ve kind of absolutely run out of time otherwise we could have continued for another half-an-hour at least.
Thank you for being an attentive audience.
[Questioner] Sir, I'm a skeptic. Sir, you… you talked about this fact that
we should enhance our competence. So how do you start this process?
[Sadhguru] IIT is a beginning. So… what are you skeptical about?
You don’t believe competence will work in this world, is it?
Corruption is also a certain kind of competence, anyway.
[Questioner] That was supposed to be a joke.
[Sadhguru] Okay, that’s supposed to be a joke.
So, now, ‘How do I enhance my competence?’ See, let’s say you want to run on the field,
let’s say you want to run a race, you want to run one hundred meters.
It is not running that you have to work on right now, you have to work
on your legs and lungs and muscle and everything. Isn't it so?
So if you want to become a great engineer, yes, definitely an institute like this is crucial
on one level, but any number of people might have come here and gone, not all of them became great engineers.
Though they might have produced hundreds of great engineers,
still not all of them will become, simply because of their own
individual attitudes and competence and whatever else, isn't it?
So whatever the institute can do for you, it is doing. One foremost thing that
you need to do is to enhance your own physical and mental capabilities,
because if you want to be a good engineer you need a working brain.
Just having a degree of engineering can… may be a passport to a job,
but it is not a passport to success, isn't it?
So to have a working brain, which the engineering degree will not freeze
Usually lots of degrees, when people acquire degrees they freeze their brains;
they think they can… now they are finished using it and now they can rest it for the rest of their lives; it is not so.
This is only to enhance your capability. This is just an organized effort.
A school, a college, an institute is just an organized effort towards that,
because each individual cannot craft it for himself, that is why an institution;
otherwise an institution has no other purpose, it is here to just organize that possibility of
you striving to be of a certain competence - but that is a mass application.
But as an individual, your most important thing is you as a human being,
you are functioning at the fullest level. If that has to happen, there are other dimensions
which one needs to explore. Unfortunately though these sciences and technologies
for inner well-being have been the mainstay of this culture for thousands of years,
today we are largely losing it for various reasons because we want to
imitate somebody else, we don’t want to imitate our grandfather Topiwala anymore,
we want to imitate the hat seller from another country;
because of that we are losing those things, but we should not.
We have to bring it back into our lives, this is very much a part of the way
the culture itself is structured, that it is all about the human being.
See, this is the only culture which talks about –
which even a illiterate person in this culture is aware of –
that you can actually evolve to another dimension of existence.
Even if I go into a village and talk to an illiterate peasant, who has not read anything,
who doesn’t know anything, who has not heard any of this stuff, even to him if I go
he will not ask me, give me a golden horse’ or something, he’ll say, ‘Mukti venum Swami.’
He's saying he wants Ultimate liberation. Where did this fellow get this?
Nowhere else on the planet this is possible.
Nowhere else on this planet is it possible that an illiterate person is thinking that he can
break his present dimension of existence and go to another place, whatever that place is.
So this was bred into our culture so deep, we should not lose it. It was not just the idea –
there are technologies to become free. If you became free from the process of your body
and the process of your mind, if you can sit outside of it and work it,
you would work it brilliantly, do you understand?
You would be able to use this body and use this mind only when you're able to not treat it as ‘myself.’
These are powerful instruments in your life. These instruments can be
employed the way you want it, only when you have an outside access to it.
Right now you are a phenomenal computer, but you don’t know where the keyboard is.
When you can’t think, you scratch this spot; that’s not where it is.
Do you see people, when they cannot think, they're thinking hard, they scratch here,
it doesn’t work like that. There are proper steps that one can take;
it could be offered here if everybody's willing for that.
Sadhguru: Oh!
Sadhguru: He must be some inspiration to all of you
Sadhguru: About not drinking water
This must have happened to Abhilash
when he was on the ocean.
I want you to understand this.
If
Being on the ocean for maybe two months or three months
all by yourself,
one man boat,
means you really have to be in tune with what’s around you, many ways –
in some ways where you can logically understand,
in many ways that nobody understands
but they know it works like that.
Anybody who’s been at sea for long periods of time
has this sense.
Anybody who’s flying for a certain period of time,
they have a sense with the wind and the air in a certain way
Not all of it is scientific knowledge,
not all of it is intellectually correct
but they just know that’s how it is
and it always works that way
because
Like every other creature which lives in water,
they know things which no naval officer will know.
A dolphin
or a whale
or a shark
knows things about the ocean and water and its behavior
which no oceanographer knows in the world
because it’s not an intellectual understanding,
you’re part of that.
So in some way,
someone who wants to go around the world in a boat all by himself,
in a sailboat,
without any engines or anything,
obviously you get into tune with water around you,
otherwise it wouldn’t really work for you.
First of all,
you won’t mentally survive that.
Forget about physically making it,
mentally you wouldn’t survive that
unless there is a certain affinity
between you and that element.
So when you’re in such a state,
you know,
particularly being in the ocean,
largely being in the sun,
The respiration process in the skin is greatly enhanced when you are
in a condition like that
and you’re on the water surface,
so naturally humidity will be there.
You are taking in water –
not through your mouth,
but you’re continuously taking in water.
If you want to check,
you check your weight.
Get into the bathtub,
sit there for half an hour and check your weight,
you will be certain number of grams higher
because body will take in water.
So
No, I had some nasty joke,
let’s skip that
So, this body does soak up water,
either with contact
or with humidity in the air.
So this ability may not be same from one person to another.
One person may be doing it at a higher rate
than someone else.
And those of you getting all creamed up from head to toe,
you must know this that in many ways,
you’re taking away your contact with the existence.
Grease up the entire skin,
it won’t breathe.
When it doesn’t breathe,
its contact with air and water and world around you
Your general sensitivity will go down.
Your neuronal system,
I mean your nervous system will lose its sensitivity
because the contact,
the outer… outermost contact is being blocked up.
So the entire world is taking to this of course now
to block themselves up
because they’ll… they’ll contact the world through the Facebook, of course
Even the bears are going on the Facebook I heard.
Though
that’s different but anyway,
your need for water might have come down quite dramatically because
the humid conditions
and your own openness to the element could have done that and its
If you don’t feel thirsty,
if you don’t drink water,
nothing is going to happen,
you’re going to be fine.
It’s only in America, you will die if you don’t drink water
Nowhere else, people simply drink water.
When they get thirsty, they drink water,
otherwise they’re fine even in a desert
It’s only in America, in cold climate,
everybody is carrying a bottle and sipping continuously
because the marketing machines have done this to them,
that they must drink lots of water.
Excessive consumption of water,
especially if it’s done in small sips,
body absorbs.
When it absorbs,
the sodium levels,
which are very delicately balanced, will drop.
Rest of the body also is affected
but may not be s… so noticeable.
But in the brain, sodium levels dropping will lead to swelling of the brain.
This does not mean your brain is growing.
It means
Swelling means it’s a kind of sickness,
okay.
Not expansion of the brain,
it’s swelling up because of lack of sodium content.
Because there’s not enough sodium,
more water goes into the brain
trying to supply the required sodium to keep the balance.
So more water in your brain means
you will slosh
Psychological imbalances will come
when
when you manage to absorb.
See, if you drink lots of water at one go,
body will decide how much to absorb,
how much to throw out.
But if you keep sipping through the day,
body kind of gets deceived
and tends to absorb more water than it should.
But let’s say right now, you drink two liters of water,
all of it is not going to go into the system.
What is needed, it’ll take,
rest of it will be shunted out.
So
not consuming water and being out there
is very much a possibility.
Nobody need to drink water simply
because you think it’s a good thing to do.
That is what the water bottling companies are telling you,
okay.
When you feel thirsty, you must drink water.
Just to ensure you’re drinking enough,
drink ten percent more than what you actually need.
Couple of cups more
just to ensure that you don’t drink less.
If you’re not the kind
who is carrying a
water bottle with you every minute of the day,
then it’s good to drink little extra water
so that when the need comes,
you have certain amount of time
before you can drink,
that it’s not an emergency.
At the same time, when you need water,
when you’re thirsty if you don’t drink,
it’ll cause damage to the system.
I would say –
this may be very controversial,
the medical fraternity will for sure protest on this
but they will come to it after maybe twenty years or thirty years
I would say if everybody consumes good water
in sufficient quantity,
fifty percent of the heart attacks in the world would come down.
Damage to the heart is immense
when the water that is needed is not there in the system.
But when I say water,
it is not just about drinking liquid water.
You must eat high water content foods.
If you eat a fruit, it’s nearly ninety percent water.
Vegetables and other things are over seventy percent water.
Minimum seventy percent water content must be there in the food that you eat.
But in this part of the world –
now it’s changing of course,
people are becoming more conscious about these things,
otherwise in this part of the world –
what people are eating is very dry food.
Everything that is here is generally dry,
only now
I think twenty-five years ago,
in this part of the world,
hardly people ate any vegetables.
Vegetarians were beaten on the streets.
Yes!
Being a vegetarian is a crime
because they think you’re weird
So, very low water content food you eat
and it goes and gets stuck in your… like concrete,
it sits in your stomach.
Now you drink water, water, water –
that’s not going to help.
You must eat high water content foods.
When you consume food,
at least it must be level
with the percentage of water content in your own body.
So any food that you eat should be
at least seventy percent water content.
So this is why
vegetables, fruits must be part of your diet,
so that it is there.
You eat bread, I don’t know, it may be
it’s just twenty, twenty-five percent water content
or even less, depending on the type of bread you eat.
If you eat meat, it’s very, very low water content.
Cooked meat has very low water content.
So when you’re on bread and meat,
you’ll have serious issues
and I’m telling you –
doctors may think I am… I need water up here
but they will come to this in twenty years, thirty years,
whatever time they take –
I will tell you if they consume high water content foods,
fifty percent of the cardiac deaths will go from the world.
People won’t die of heart attacks.
One reason they’re dying of heart attacks is
they’re eating very low water content foods.
So people may say, “What about other countries?
Why are they dying in India?”
There also, the same has happened.
What used to be traditional meals
and what they’re eating today,
it has changed dramatically
because they are also rule… ruled by commercial forces
who tell them what to eat.
They won’t listen to their bodies,
they look at the advertisement.
The big hoarding
or the television advertisement decides what you eat,
not what your body tells what to eat.
So, not consuming water in certain situations is okay.
But if there is an indication of thirst,
you must drink water.
It’s very necessary that you must drink water
when there’s an indication of thirst
because body has its own way.
When it indicates you need water,
you must give it water within twenty minutes
or at the most half an hour,
you must drink substantial quantity of water.
If you drink enough water,
then body will choose how much to take,
how much to reject.
what's the other question he asked?
Sadhguru: Oh!
Both the sun and the moon have
vibrational impact
and also gravitational impact on the water.
Only the gravitational impact of the water is noticed
by most people because
a sailor like Abhilash cannot sail
Okay, that’s a small boat, it can sail anytime.
But if you have a big ship,
you cannot sail without the tide.
You cannot leave the port without the tide.
Right from ancient times,
sailors have always looked for tide.
Without the tide,
there is no question of sailing in the ocean –
without the help of the tide.
So understanding when it comes up,
when it goes down was very, very important.
Generally, to put it in a very simple terms,
though the
See,
it’s the same gravitational pull,
which is managing Planet Earth and moon.
But the centrifugal force
of the rotation
and the gravitational force somehow are so perfectly balanced
that they’re holding on together.
But actually,
the center of the mass is in one place,
it’s not in two places.
So it’s one gravity managing two bodies,
two celestial bodies.
You know, Planet Earth is also a celestial body.
It’s a heavenly body –
you’re in heaven,
missing the whole point
If you were looking
If you are standing on Planet Mars,
Earth would look like heaven or no?
It is a heavenly body
and for sure the best planet on the
in the system at least,
in this solar system
It is for sure heaven in this solar system, isn't it?
Okay, we’re messing it up, that’s different but
it can fix itself.
If we vanish, it’ll fix itself pretty good.
If fifty-sixty percent of the human beings disappear somewhere,
let’s say they go to Mars
you will see Planet Earth will
just revitalize itself
and flourish in a big way
because she still has water.
Water has not been lost. You know,
all of you are water bottles.
You
You’re little more than them
but
this is a water body, isn't it?
Hmm?
Seventy percent water, just shake and see
So
7.3 billion people.
Let’s say on an average,
all of them weigh sixty kilograms.
I’m not taking into the heavyweights
taking into account the heavyweights
but let’s say on an average,
sixty kilograms everybody weighs.
Out of sixty,
at least forty kilograms of water,
that means forty liters of water per person carrying.
Forty liters into 7.3 billion,
how many liters?
It’s almost an ocean by itself.
So where is the water?
It’s all here
It’s never left the atmosphere and gone anywhere.
The volume of water that was here a billion years ago
is still here
but all in unworthy packages
So
the impact of the sun and the moon,
the gravitational impact is noticed,
but the reverberational impact is not largely felt by people.
But the Eastern societies have seen this in a
as an immense possibility
and making use
How to make use of pournami and amavasya
or the full moon and the new moon
is an entire process by itself.
If you do not know this,
before the British came to India,
pournami means or full moon means three days holiday.
Amavasya means… New moon means two days holiday.
So totally, five days holiday in a month.
No Sunday, Monday and all this stuff,
only by looking at the moon
because this is not just arithmetic calculation,
this is a life-related thing that’s happening.
Whatever happens to the moon,
whatever happens to the sun,
whatever happens to the planet,
happens to us
and to be in tune with that,
those days you’re not supposed to work.
You use those days to stabilize yourself,
balance yourself,
raise yourself to higher possibilities
and other days you go to work.
So
these two days
or even in between, in different phases,
it has different ty… kind of impacts –
what is generally noticed is rising of the water in the form of a tide.
Suppose yesterday high tide was let’s say at 9:30
(Talks aside: We have few more minutes because we started late?)
Yesterday it started at 9:30,
today it will be at 10:20
because there is a fifty minute lapse between the moon’s way of doing things
and the earth’s way of doing things.
This does it in twenty-four hours,
that does it in twenty-four hours and fifty minutes,
so there’s approximately forty-eight to fifty minutes of difference in the ti… high tide
from one day to the next.
So, when you look at this,
every… every monthly, monthly cycle,
it becomes a complex affair
to calculate and to be
Today of course, it’s all being done in a digital way
through the satellites,
otherwise a sailor had to have a very complex kind of arrangement in his head
as to how this is
because if you don’t know this,
you won’t survive.
Many
Almost every creature of the sea knows this very well
and the birds which migrate know this very well
and there’re some incredible facts
about the navigating birds which travel
or which migrate during certain seasons and get back,
as to how they manage this entire process.
The water,
the… the gravitational pull of the moon,
it affects the flying objects too,
particularly when you’re flying on your own power,
flapping your wings.
Even slightest movement in the gravitation
and the reverberation affects them.
How they manage this,
how they go through this
is a very, very interesting story –
not just birds,
even insects
because dragonflies in Southern India
every year make a trip to East Africa and come back.
How’s that for you?
Safari
Dragonfly, this big
every year, they go all the way to East Africa,
breed there,
then come up
and multiply their numbers about three or four times
and come back to India
And they know the way,
they’ve never missed the way.
All the way they go and come back every time.
But now,
the navigational activity on the big ships and airplanes,
they’re disturbing them
and many of them are losing their way
because the reverberations have changed.
One big jet goes and it completely disturbs
and freaks their ability to navigate.
That’s happening to I think every creature,
including human beings,
that whatever we were capable of naturally
is all going away
because of too many gadgets doing things
and too many vibrations happening around us,
sensitivity will become less and less.
About the influence on the human mind,
human body –
the maximum impact of these planetary objects
upon water
and the maximum impact is on the human being,
not on the other creatures
because we are vertical in our spine.
If we were like this
it wouldn’t impact us to the same extent.
Because we are like this
we are a stand-up bottle,
because of that the pull is big
and the rise of the water affects us quite substantially.
We know that
it disturbs certain people,
certain people get headaches on full moon days,
some people get mentally disturbed
and all these things.
The moon or the position of the moon
or the gravitational impact of the moon
does not cause either mental imbalance
or headache
or any other problem.
It only rises,
it only enhances you on that day
because there is more pressure upon your brain,
there is more flow of fluids into the brain.
If you are loving,
you’ll become far more loving.
If you’re joyful,
you become far more joyful.
If you’re miserable,
you become far more miserable.
if you’re meditative, you become far more meditative.
If you’re mad, you become far more mad.
It is not trying to bring any particular quality,
it is just that the waters are rising.
Because of that,
whatever is your quality right now gets enhanced.
So, the impact of
different positions of the moon and sun upon the human body is phenomenal.
If we go into the details of it,
it’s an entire process of itself.
As I said,
generally people are noticing only the gravitational impact upon the water
but not the vibrational impact.
But today,
there are lots of studies telling you that
if you create different kinds of vibrations
or different kind of sounds,
the water responds in different ways.
I don’t know if we have that video with us.
(Talks aside: Do we? Can we play this?)
So, depending upon the type of sounds we create,
accordingly the water takes on different shapes and forms
and patterns,
which are very geometrically correct kind of patterns
for different sounds.
And you know that
the Sheffield University first did this a few years ago,
now people are telling me
NASA has published something,
that talking about
they recorded the sound of the sun.
Have you heard about this?
Hmm?
So clearly, sound Aum is coming.
So these things are not new to us,
these things something we have noticed
because every cell in this body is solar-powered,
okay.
You may call it so many things
but essentially,
whether you burn coal
or you burn diesel or petrol
or nuclear energy,
whatever the hell you do,
essentially all of it is solar energy converted and stored in different ways, isn't it?
If there’s no sun,
there would be no hydrocarbons for sure,
there’s no question about that.
So, the reverberations of… Yeah
So everything that’s happening in nature,
whatever shapes and forms that
different life forms are taking
is essentially largely related to how the water reverberates,
including yourself.
How the water is reverberating within yourself,
that is the kind of form.
Both the physical form and the psychological form that you take
is largely dependent upon this and thank you very much
Moderator (Maa Idaa): Sadhguru, these days, many people are diagnosed with thyroid problems,
either hypothyroidism or… hyper or hypothyroidism.
Even though we are consuming iodized salt, still thyroid problems are prevalent.
What is the cause for the increase in these problems?
Is it stress-related like diabetes or hypertension?
Can we overcome these conditions with hatha yoga, or kriya,
or being in a consecrated space like Isha Yoga Center?
What are the things we can do to come out of it?
Sadhguru: I think a whole lot of people have come out of it with hatha yoga practice,
no question about it.
Being in a consecrated place definitely adds to it.
But this pretty widespread manifestation of thyroid imbalance
See, we must understand this.
What you’re calling as thyroid -
in yoga, we don’t look at the glands like that
but - medically, what you’re calling as thyroid is
that secretion within you,
which is trying to calibrate your system on a daily basis.
It’s just calibrating how much digestion should happen,
how much energy should be produced,
how much fat should be produced,
how much muscle should be built,
everything, it’s trying to calibrate your physical structure.
Your physical structure is very closely related to your psychological structure.
Today, there is substantial evidence to show you
that if you sit here and think of the mountain,
your glandular function will happen in a certain way,
if you think about a tiger, it’ll happen another way,
you think about a ocean, it’ll happen another way,
you think of a man or a woman, it’ll happen another way.
Just a thought – nothing,
no contact with mountain,
no contact with tiger,
no contact with man, woman or ocean –
just a thought will fluctuate the glandular function.
I’m saying that is how fine the system is
that it is trying to calibrate everything to keep you in a good place.
The problem with you is you need a bullock cart
because you are the missing link (Laughs).
You need a bullock cart but they gave you a fine spaceship, tch.
Every little thing will do a world of things.
Simply if you touch it, it’ll go boom,
waves of stuff happening in the system.
Simply if you look like this (Gestures)
and make one conclusion about the tree,
this (Referring to oneself) will go into many varieties of chemical
and other kinds of variations.
Glandular functions will change.
wherever you may be, whether you’re in Mumbai, or New York, or London, wherever
just look at the situation in which you’re walking.
Maybe socially, you’ve gotten used to those things.
But look at the kind of atmosphere you’re walking in,
the number of things that are happening.
None of them are conducive for this life (Referring to oneself).
You might have gotten adjusted to it,
maybe now you can’t live out of those cities, that’s another matter
but the life that you are, is not seeking that kind of atmosphere.
So the number of variations that are happening within you
are not in your favor.
Glandular dysfunction is just one manifestation.
A very highly calibrated function of glandular function,
one thing is
the thyroid.
It’s easily noticeable,
the first thing,
your physiological and psychological parameters get thrown off a bit,
simply because disturbance.
And another dimension is
what’s the disturbance that’s happening from within you –
your own psychological patterns.
Another dimension of disturbance is
what kind of food is getting into you.
There is no way you can eat anything today,
which is not chemically infested.
If you’re eating very organic food,
it’s little organic chemicals they’re using.
It’s come to that place (A participant laughs).
It’s very difficult to eat something that’s just grown in the wild forest,
you can pluck out something and eat.
That’s very, very little.
Not even a small percentage of people are capable of eating that anymore.
It’s all from the marketplace.
And what goes into the marketplace is all about more,
not about what.
And also this, in this country (Laughs)
All these things are gone now, don’t worry.
My grandmother
Every day the vegetable-seller
You know, they used to come home with a basket,
just then in the morning they would have plucked,
by 7:30, 8:00 they are at the doorstep.
When they come
and she will look at this.
When she wants to buy it,
she won’t allow the vegetable-seller to touch the vegetables.
They plucked and brought it,
it’s fresh, just now it’s come off the plant
but if it has to go into the balance
or if she has to choose one, two, three, four, like this,
she won’t let them touch it.
“You don’t touch my vegetables.”
This is not to keep bacteria away.
She doesn’t want that woman or that man to touch the vegetables
that her children and grandchildren will eat.
She will touch it in a certain way, tch,
she will fondle it,
she’ll caress it,
she’ll look at it like this, like this (Gestures)
and then she will cut it and make it.
Don’t think this is all funny.
If all these things are missing in your life,
you have to take pills to manage your glandular function.
And there is no way by popping a pill,
you can get it into balance.
You can suppress it,
you cannot get it into proper balance,
no way, because every day it’s different,
every moment it’s different.
This is calibration,
a very active calibration that’s happening.
You kill it and des… just take a pill and somehow manage –
you are a little dysfunctional machine.
With this dysfunction,
this dysfunctional machine will manifest in so many ways.
And you will only know it when you stretch it.
When you’re living with minimal stuff,
it won’t show up.
It’s like this.
See, even if you have a flat tire on your car,
at twenty kilometers you can drive home, you know (Laughs).
Some things will crack up,
some things will tear up but still you can drive.
Only if you’re hitting two-hundred kilometers per hour,
then if the tire goes flat,
then you know you fly off the road.
So, that’s all it is.
If all these things are taken care of well,
now when you rev up your life to function at a much higher level,
simply it’ll go.
Now you rev up your life without bringing that balance,
then you see it’ll freak.
You will see this happening all around you every day.
So, to invest that much into our lives,
well, you can’t leave your city and go and live in the jungle.
You can’t leave the atmospheres and go away.
At least you must equip yourself,
so that those things don’t have too much impact on you.
It’ll anyway have impact but how much is the question,
how much impact?
At least within your home,
surround yourself with some plants.
If there is no space,
fill your room.
This is going to have some freaky bedrooms (A participant laughs).
Open up half the roof.
“Oh, but there’s another floor above, Sadhguru” (Laughter).
Okay, open up the damn wall,
so that some sunlight comes into you.
Yes.
Not everything is closed
and just one air conditioner is going brrrr all the time.
This is one thing.
The reverberations around you are freaking this body completely.
All the time brrrr
Particularly when I’m outside the country,
particularly in United States –
even in Europe, it’s little better –
in United States, all the time something is buzzing, hmmm, endlessly.
When I come here,
it’s like (Gestures),
you know just still, which makes you alive.
Everything is buzzing, you are like poof (Laughs).
Most people are not conscious of it but it’s happening to them.
The very fact that they’re sleeping eight hours a day is just that,
that they’re not living in their natural habitat.
They are trying to protect themselves by sleeping.
So, to protect yourself from disease,
to protect yourself from mental illnesses,
to protect yourself from all kinds of imbalances,
you sleep eight-ten hours a day.
This is half your life, you’re dead.
Death is always a good fix
but that’s not the fix we’re looking for.
We’re looking for a life fix,
not an end fix.
If you end something, it is fixed, isn’t it?
Hmm?
Fixed or no?
Fixed, but not the way we want (Laughs).
We want to be here, alive and be fully fixed.
So if this has to happen,
you can –
I know you may look freaky,
even I will think you’re freaky -
but you can bring some plant life into place where you sleep
When you walk, you must always be conscious of the life other than human life.
Most people are not even conscious of the human beings,
so I am reminding you, you must be conscious of everything that is alive.
A tree, a plant, a blade of grass,
a grasshopper hopping
and the people that you don’t like are passing by (Laughs),
all kinds of things.
You must be alive to everything.
Don’t need to do any “Oh, I love the tree” (Few laugh)!
You don’t have to love the tree,
you (Laughs)
you have to be nourished by it, that’s the only way to live.
You like it or not, it’s nourishing you right now.
Consciously if you do it, everything will work better.
Something as simple as being alive to everything around you indiscriminately
may regularize your thyroid problems.
Tch, of course, morning hatha yoga is there,
kriyas are there,
all these things will definitely help.
And the consecrated… powerfully consecrated spaces are there,
many things
One of the main reasons is,
human beings are becoming less and less active as technology grows.
In a day, on an average…average human being,
how much activity, physical activity, they used to perform in the past,
previous generations of people
and how much physical activity all of us are performing right now,
is abysmally low.
With such a low level of activity,
keeping the balance in the system is difficult.
So a little imbalance,
don’t go to bed. If you feel little imbalanced,
you must get… jump into activity.
Wherever activity is happening with some vigor and joy,
you must jump into that activity, and do more and more of it if you’re feeling sick –
really
because the moment you go back,
you are empowering that.
Well, if you’re very ill, that’s a different thing
but otherwise, you must
For… We’re talking about essentially glandular dysfunction of various kinds,
activity is a simple solution for everything.
And don’t make activity –
for those of you in New York, I’m telling you –
don’t make activity… You have that health band on your thing (Gestures) (Laughter).
Ten steps (Gestures) (Laughter),
twelve steps (Gestures) (Laughter) –
don’t do this,
that’s not the way to do activity,
you may get more sick by doing that.
Simply, joyfully doing something
Being joyfully alive
Activity is
If you do not know how to sit here and be exuberantly alive,
just go and play
play a game,
run around simply.
Just imitate the grasshopper when you’re walking (Laughter).
Try.
Why not?
You never did this?
This’s the problem with you (Few laugh).
When you go now, I want to see you (Gestures) (Laughter)
because you’re going to walk on the grass (Laughter),
you better grow like a grasshopper,
chuk, chuk, chuk, chuk, chuk (Gestures).
You will see how much aliveness will happen with you (Laughs).
Essentially, you
your fundamental problem is you have become bloody serious about your life.
Tch,
so, we have to again remind you, you will die anyway,
don’t be so serious about it (Laughs) because
it’ll get over in no time.
You must loosen the grip.
Now if you loosen the grip,
that last scene can be different.
Otherwise, people see you (Gestures) (A participant laughs)
That’s a great thing that happened to you – you loosened the grip.
Now itself if you loosen the grip,
you will see life will happen wonderfully well for you.
Questioner: Sadhguru, Namaskaram.
You mentioned in your previous discourses
that thirty percent of the illnesses are body
while the rest are mind-created.
I just want to know in case you do get an illness,
how do you know that it's mind-created
or it's of the body?
And in case it's psychosomatic in nature,
what would be the emotional and the thought pattern that’s behind it?
How would you find that out and correct it if possible?
Thank you.
Sadhguru: Suppose your right hand gets up and does funny things and smashes you,
pokes your eyes (Gestures) (Laughter),
do you have an ailment or no?
Yes, isn't it?
For sure you have.
That’s exactly what your mind is doing, isn't it?
It gets up, pops around, hurts you, pokes you,
makes you cry, makes you (Laughs) suffer
do you have an ailment or no?
If your hand started pocking at you,
hitting you, beating you up, definitely you are sick, isn't it?
Yes.
So if your thoughts and emotions are poking you,
strangling you and torturing you every day, aren’t you sick I’m asking?
Hmm?
By your own definition I’m going (Laughs).
So because this sickness is on,
it will manifest in so many ways in the physical body.
There is no question anymore.
Every thought, every reverberation on the level of the mind,
depending upon the type of reverberation you create,
the whole chemistry is going through a change.
It's all been measured.
Right now you sit here and think about tigers,
you have one kind of chemistry
chemical changes happen.
You think about flowers, another kind of chemical change happens.
All this has been measured.
So for every thought,
if the whole chemistry is going through thing –
if your mind is in this state,
you know what kind of soup you’re making?
You’re a lousy soup (Laughs).
Not just lousy, poisonous.
If you’re soaked in this poisonous soup on a daily basis,
how to know well-being?
It’ll not happen like that.
We don’t have so much control today in the world
as to what we eat, what we drink, what we breathe
all of it is somewhat poisoned.
Modern societies have started treating
disease, ailment as a natural process, which is a serious mistake.
Ancient societies always saw disease as something wrong
that’s not how a man is shou… man should be.
A human being should not be in any state of illness
Illness means something fundamentally wrong.
But modern societies have started treating this as normal
because there’s an industry which thrives on you (Laughs),
very major industry.
The second largest industry on the planet is pharmaceuticals
So if the second largest industry on the planet is pharmaceuticals,
there’s too much lousy soup (Laughs), isn't it?
Every day you have to add something to this to make it (Gestures).
No, if you’re willing we can make this (Referring to oneself) into a very wonderful soup.
The chemistry is in a fantastic state
to be blissful is natural.
If you do this, believe me seventy percent of the ailments will vanish from the planet.
Another thirty percent
there are many external influences which are not always in control.
You cannot control that, only to some extent.
So if you’re constantly creating a nasty chemistry within you,
how is life within you supposed to understand you’re seeking well-being?
How?
It's just unfair (Laughs).
Life within you thinks,
“He likes ailments,” and gives it to you.
Yes?
If you’re poisoning your system from within
for which there is substantial proof
for every thought and emotion the chemical composition of your body is changing,
if you’re creating poison from within you and you want to live well,
how is it?
Life doesn’t work like that.
Unless you do the right things, right things will not happen to you.
I know when somebody says, “I’m not well,” you’re supposed to sweet-talk them – “Don’t worry, everything will be okay,” but I’m like this, what to do? Because I’m not a solace, I’m a solution.
(Sadhguru): If you have to enter a dimension beyond the physical,
a perception beyond the five senses have to be opened up.
These five sense organs open up in you
The moment you crawl out of your mother’s womb,
five senses open up because they’re needed for survival.
If you did not have them
you would not know how to survive.
Survival process opens up for you naturally.
Suppose as a little infant
you were lost in the jungle
if something edible came in front of you
would you take it and shove it into your ears
or into your nostrils?
You would definitely know where to put it, isn't it?
Nobody taught you.
Nobody need to instruct you
this is the way to eat, but it’ll go right here. Isn't it so?
So things that are necessary for your survival,
it does not need any training,
it does not need any striving from your end,
it’s inbuilt,
but would you know how to read,
how to write,
how to do so many things
that you’re naturally doing today?
No.
Because all these things need striving.
You know, the damn ‘A’?
Do you remember the damn ‘A’?
Those three lines,
when you were three-and-half years of age,
they tried to make you write it, the damn ‘A’,
how complicated it looked!
Yes or no?
Even now there’s an adult who never was taught
how to read and write, in some village,
you try to teach him the damn ‘A’,
how he struggles even today as a grown up adult!
Because anything beyond survival will not enter your life
unless you strive for it,
but what is needed for survival opens up without any striving.
So if a dimension beyond the physical has to enter your living experience,
a little striving is needed
but because it’s in a completely different direction
All your sense organs are outward-bound, please see this.
You can see what’s around you,
you can't roll your eye balls inward and scan yourself.
You can hear that; so much activity in this body,
can you hear that?
No.
Even if an ant crawls upon this hand,
you can feel it;
so much blood flowing, can you feel it?
In the very nature of things,
sense organs are outward-bound
but everything that you experience happens within you.
Right now,
a simple question
do all of you see me at least?
Am I visible to every…?
Because sometimes I’m invisible, you know.
Today am I visible?
Today am I visible?
Please use your hands and show me where am I?
Ah, you got it totally wrong.
You know I’m a mystic. (laughs)
Now this light is falling upon me,
reflecting, going through your lenses,
inverted image in the retina,
don’t you know the whole story?
So where do you see me?
Where am I right now?
Within you.
Where do you hear me?
Within you.
Where have you seen the whole world?
Within you, isn't it?
Have you ever experienced anything outside of you?
Have you?
Have you?
Right now you just touch your friend and see,
you don’t feel his hand,
you will only feel the way your sensations are;
you cannot experience his hand, please know this.
You can only know the way your sensations are.
You have never experienced anything beyond this.
Everything that’s happened to you
your joy and misery has happened within you,
light and darkness has happened within you,
just everything happens within you,
but do you have a means to look inward?
No right now;
so that will not happen unless you strive.
It happened one day
someone came looking for Isha Yoga Center, in South India,
to a nearby village.
They came and asked the local boy,
‘How far is Isha Yoga Center?’
The boy said, ‘It’s 24,996 miles.’
‘What?! That far?’
He said, ‘Yes, the way you’re going.
If you turn around it’s four miles.’ (Laughter)
So right now everything that you have is outward-bound
but everything that’s happening is happening within,
so it gives you a completely false perception of what it is.
So turning within will take a little bit of striving.
If you’re willing to give 28 hours of focused time,
we can turn you around.
Sadhguru: Right now I hear
there’s only one phone in United States, is
the iPhone.
it's a good phone
but what we are forgetting is the ‘I’.
The iPhone is all right,
but the ‘I’ is the most important thing,
iPhone is just a little gadget produced by this,
larger gadget -
this is the gadget, isn't it?
All the other gadgets have been produced by this gadget. (Pointing to himself)
If you pay little attention to this one,
if the necessary understanding and awareness
and ability to transform this gadget
happens within you,
your ability to live will be greatly, greatly enhanced.
Then outside technologies are not a barrier,
outside technologies are a boon that’s been offered to us.
But the boons that have been offered to us
are turning into curses in people’s lives
simply because they have not taken care of this one;
they’re only trying to take care of the external situation.
we have done lot of engineering in the world outside
and because of this
we have a huge level of comfort and convenience
in the world today.
The kind of comfort and convenience that
no other generation of people could have ever imagined,
that level of comfort and convenience we have.
Though we have this,
though we are the most comfortable generation
ever on the planet,
we cannot claim that we are the most peaceful generation,
we cannot claim we are the most joyful
or loving generation on the planet for sure.
So in many ways,
this generation is becoming the most neurotic generation
or most complaining generation
because we have taken care of the outside
but we have not taken care of the inside.
The world is engineered the way we want it,
but are we engineered the way we want ourselves to be?
So, there is a certain way
to engineer our system,
to make this body,
to make this mind,
to very chemistry within us, the way we want it.
If our wish is to be blissful
to make the world blissful (Laughs),
it would take too many things
but to make this one person blissful,
a willing person,
somebody who wants to be blissful,
it shouldn’t be difficult at all.
But this is not been done because
people have never paid attention
to the mechanics of how a human being functions
and to engineer that the way we want it.
So these are technologies for inner well-being
Everybody wants health,
peace,
blissfulness,
but these are simple things.
Why these things are not happening is,
we have never paid attention
to the inner mechanism of what a human being is.
To pay attention to that
and to create it the way we want it,
this is ‘Inner Engineering’.
Sadhguru: we will teach a certain process
which is known as the ‘Shambhavi Mahamudra’.
This is a way of activating your energies
in such a way
that the very fundamental chemistry in your body
will alter itself within a matter of two to three weeks.
One can even measure this in the laboratories -
such experiments have been done
how the blood chemistry changes
within three weeks of practice has been recorded
and you can make your chemistry
a chemistry of blissfulness.
Once your system come to… comes to absolute ease,
there will be no dis-ease.
What is being taught is a scientific process,
step-by-step it’ll be taught.
We need twenty-eight hours to impart this,
twenty-eight to thirty hours of focused time.
So, it takes that much time to practically
and experientially impart this.
One aspect of the program is
to bring a deeper understanding to their own system,
to their physical system,
to their energy system,
to their chemistry,
to their emotional aspects of them
and also the psychological structures.
Once they understand few basics,
then we teach methods
with which they can make these dimensions
within themselves in a conscious manner
Sadhguru: It does not demand any lifestyle changes;
it just takes only twenty-one minutes of your day.
If you’re willing to dedicate twenty-one minutes of your day
to this simple process,
it has been life-transforming for millions of people
this is not a religion,
this is not some kind of a teaching,
this is not a philosophy;
this is a technology.
One has to just learn how to use it,
like how you learn to use your iPhone,
similarly you learn to use this ‘I’
to its optimum level,
to its fullest capacity
Isha Foundation is a hundred percent volunteer organization -
the volunteers are taking it to the people
because it's made such a big difference in their life
and they want to share it.
Their dedication, their time,
their life is being given to make this happen
to many other people
and this is my wish and my blessing
that every human being,
we do not know what you will achieve
in the outside world or not,
but this much every human being deserves,
that his experience of life on this planet
is a pleasant experience.
This much everybody is able to do
if only if they turn inward.
these simple tools will help people
to bring themselves
to a new level of balance and pleasantness within themselves.
This is something every human being deserves.
Devi Shetty: Today the medical science has reached a level Sadhguru,
we really do not have to touch the patient.
When I see a patient in my office,
he would have undergone all kinds of tests, everything is done,
all the images are displayed, history is written, everything is planned.
Technically, I can see the reports and tell the patient
“Okay you need a bypass or you need valve replacement.”
But, I always make it a point to take my stethoscope,
put it on the chest,
listen to the heart,
look at the patient’'s eyes,
put my hand around on his shoulders,
touch the patient
and then explain to them what is going on and talk to the family.
I personally feel that touch is the
has the most healing power, than anything else what we have invented (Applause).
Do you believe in that Swamiji?
Sadhguru: See, what is not understood is
yes one part of us is mechanical,
but there are other dimensions.
Most of the time the mechanical part has gone wrong
because we have not tended to the other dimensions.
So what is lacking in their life is, their life is not touched -
not necessarily… a physical touch is just a manifestation,
essentially their life is not touched by anything.
When I say touched by anything,
it need not necessarily be a relationship,
you can be touched by so many things.
I don't know how many of you
when was the last
how many decades ago did you watch a sunrise (Laughter)
or a sunset
or a moonrise?
I am saying not touched by anything.
When was it the last time you waited for a flower to bloom?
No such thing.
When is the last time you paid an attention to a butterfly or a leaf or a flower or another human being?
You’re… (Laughter)
You don’t like faces, you like the Facebook. (Laughter)
I am saying contact with life whether it's human, animal, plant-life or just elements around you,
just that - how many people even take a moment
to even look at the food that they’re going to consume
with a little bit of involvement or are they touched by it?
No.
So al… at last either a doctor has to touch it or
in the end undertaker will touch you. (Laughter)
Somebody will touch you, things gone bad, somebody has to touch you.
So does touch have a relevance?
Tremendous relevance. Touch need not always be physical,
it can be in so many different ways.
If you’re not touched by life - you are a dying life,
you are not a living life.
It may happen to you after some time
but it's happening,
you are in progression.
Because what you call as life even in the physical level -
it's a medical knowledge for everybody now
the number of cells you have is more than the number of stars in the Milky Way, okay?
Every day over six hundred million-billion cells are dying
and new cells are being born,
that means every second ten million cells are dying
and ten million new cells are born in your body.
If you just take
leave the old guys,
if you just take charge of these new ten million cells every… every second that’s coming up in your body,
if you structure them properly, create them properly,
if you have some say in how they will happen,
if you have some influence as to how these fresh cells are born,
your heart should be fixed,
your brain should be fixed,
everything should be fixed because that is the level of opportunity you have to rejuvenate your life second to second.
But because you are totally oblivious to life
when I say oblivious to life, I want you to look at this
right now you cannot even call yourself as a living being,
because most of the time what is happening with you is just thought and emotion.
Thought and emotion is just psychological drama,
it has no existential relevance.
Here a thousand people can sit here
and live in thousand different worlds right now,
that means nobody is in reality.
Nobody is living,
everybody is thinking about life.
Psychological space, what happens,
has unfortunately overtaken the existential process of life.
You do not experience life,
you’re only thinking and reacting to situations around you.
Thought and emotion is dominating everything.
So, right now today morning sun came up on time
you don’t think much about that “Okay so what?” (Laughter)
No, you need to understand,
if sun does not come up tomorrow morning,
within eighteen hours all life on this planet will largely seize as we know it.
So I am telling you sun came up on time today morning.
I want to hear appropriate noises (Applause) (Devi Shetty Laughs).
None of the planets in this solar system collided today (Laughter/Applause).
In the whole universe no accidents,
in this endless cosmos no accidents,
everything going great but you have one nasty little thought crawling in your head and it's a bad day (Laughter).
I am saying you’ve completely lost perceptive with life.
You lost perceptive as to who you are.
It's a kind of madness.
So once you lose perceptive as to who you are
and what is your space and status in this existence,
you are a sickness by nature.
It is not doctor has to diagnose you, it's already on.
One day it will manifest to a point where
his instruments or his touch will tell him but it's already on.
The process is on.
When it goes beyond a point,
he will give you a prescription or a surgery
but the process is on, you are working hard towards it (Few Laugh).
Sadhguru: See, morality
morality has become an important thing in the society
because people have forsaken their humanity.
If your humanity was alive and active,
you would not need any morality.
People have put their humanity to sleep
and trying to behave like human beings with morality
and it's not working
because everybody will come up with his own morality.
And your kind of morality and another person’s kind of morality is at war all the time.
What is right and wrong,
if you open this debate you will end up with a fight,
even within your family, believe me.
Yes or no?
No?
If you start a debate as to what is right and what is wrong,
whether it's in your
in the world
or in your neighborhood
or within the family,
fight is inevitable because no two people can agree on what is right and wrong
and it's never been settled ever
because no such thing exists.
Instead of trying to be right,
why don’t people try to be sensible?
We need some sense in the planet.
These righteous people are always a trouble.
Once you have a strong set of morals,
you will see nobody in the world is all right.
If nobody in the world is okay,
you have a psychological problem.
The first sign of psychological imbalance is you start thinking,
‘Nobody is okay.’
So morality is just that it's the first step towards insanity.
You just have to stretch it;
if you stretch it, you will go there.
Maybe you won't stretch it that far,
you are willing to bend it. So you manage.
These are substitutes for humanity.
Why is it… our education systems,
our social mechanisms,
we are not doing enough to stir up humanity in a human being,
we are trying to fix it with morality and it's never worked.
All we will do is divide people into different kinds of moral sects
and they will always fight
because nobody can fit into your morality
because even you don’t fit in actually.
Unless… you are smart enough to subvert it secretly (Laughs),
you understand?
Otherwise it doesn’t work
because morality will not just stick to your profession,
it will enter every aspect of your life.
Once you start thinking what is the right thing to do in my profession,
you will also think what is the right thing to do on all levels of life, isn't it?
Once you start thinking this is the right thing
and somebody else think that is the right thing,
there is going to be a conflict
and a constant conflict.
If you stir up the humanity within you,
you will do the most sensible thing that’s needed for that moment
and that's all that matters that
your actions are in context with the realities in which you exist.
And the context is always changing;
if you don’t change according to that,
once
People who are moralistic are always looking archaic for the new generation of people, isn't it?
They wonder why these guy is still alive. (Laughs)
Yes.
If you’re very moralistic,
even your children will wonder why are you still alive,
because you look like you are from somewhere else.
So what is the most sensible thing to do
what brings well-being to you and everybody around you;
this is all one needs to look at constantly.
Is there some way to fix it?
There is no way to fix it.
We have to be alive to it;
we have to be alive to it every moment
and as the context changes,
what we do has to change.
Morality and mortality are not very different. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: What you can do and what you cannot do,
nobody else can decide for you,
nor can you decide,
because when we say ‘what you can’
we’re talking about a capability.
Capabilities are never stagnant;
capabilities can be constantly enhanced, isn’t it?
So,
there’s really no limit as to
what one can do,
because capabilities can be constantly enhanced.
It’s better to look at it in terms of
‘am I holding myself back
for concerns other than what I want?’
Many human beings,
you have seen people whom you,
who are historically known as great beings;
this is all that happened to them.
They were living with a limited identification.
Suddenly for some reason,
some event broke their identities
and suddenly they identified with a larger
process that was happening around
and they did things that they themselves could not imagine.
For example Mahatma Gandhi,
a very limited man,
He could not make a living.
He got qualified as a lawyer.
I remember what he wrote when he
when he went out to fight his first case in the court in India
he says, ‘I stood up to argue my case
and my heart sank into my boots.’
This… was his expression,
and of course he lost the case.
Then he decided this law is not for him.
He must seek some other profession because
he doesn’t have the courage to stand up and speak in a court room.
Does that sound like Mahatma Gandhi?
The man just moved millions of people.
Just one incident,
suddenly his old identities broke.
He went to South Africa to make a living
and he was doing okay as a lawyer.
And one day he bought a first class ticket in a train
and got in
and he traveled some distance.
In the next station somewhere,
another…a white South African got in.
And he didn’t like a brown skin man sitting in a first class,
so he called the ticket collector.
Ticket collector said, ‘Get out!’
Mahatma Gandhi said,
‘I have a first class ticket.’
He said, ‘It doesn’t matter, just get out.’
He said, ‘No, I have a first class ticket.
Why should I get out?’
So they threw him out of the train.
His luggage and everything they just threw him out
and he fell on the platform
and he just sat there for hours.
‘Why did this happen to me?
I bought a first class ticket.
Why am I thrown out of a train?’
Suddenly he identified himself with a larger predicament of the people.
Till then his survival, his law, his making money was all important.
Suddenly he identified with a much larger problem that existed
and he became a colossus
just broke that little identification
and moved into a much larger identity.
Probably there is never been another man on this planet
who moved as many people as Mahatma Gandhi moved,
with such simple ways.
I don’t call him a spiritual person,
but socially, politically absolutely relevant for that day.
Never before another conquering force on the planet has been
made to vacate the land
where they had taken roots,
without firing bullets at them
or killing them or anything like this.
Never before such a thing has happened.
People who have conquered the land,
have conquered at a certain price,
they won’t go easy.
They won’t go easy,
but it was made to look as if they went easy.
It didn’t happen easy,
but without fighting,
without bloodshed,
because the man could move people into that kind of action
but a kind of passive action.
See, shooting at the soldiers who’re carrying guns is one thing.
Throwing bombs at them is another thing,
but just going there,
standing on the street
and willing to be beaten down on the heads;
with cracked skulls you fall down.
One line of people fall down,
the next line of people come and give their skulls to be broken again,
is a completely different kind of strength.
It’s not easy.
It takes a very deep inner strength for a person to do that.
Dying in fighting is different.
You are also fighting;
somebody else also is fighting with you.
You get killed;
that’s a different thing.
Without fighting just going and getting killed is a very different thing;
and that’s what he managed to do.
And all that happened to him was
from his small identity of himself and his family
and wanting to make a living,
his identity just exploded,
identifying with a larger problem of the people
that was there at that time.
So,
don’t put a limit on yourself as to what you can do
and what you cannot do.
You do everything that you can do,
what does not happen is what you could not do, isn’t it?
What did not happen is what you could not do, isn’t it?
But you did everything possible,
everything that you can imagine,
still some things didn’t happen.
Those are things you cannot do.
Questioner: You used the word temple city.
Now, don’t you think that would be the beginning of all the problems because if you take history,
all the major battles have been fought
because of theism,
because of religion.
My this thing would be,
could we label it differently,
I mean temple in every city would be... could be
Sadhguru: No. I did not say temple in every city, did I say that?
I said you must... your home, your... your city,
your town and your state and your nation
and the world should become like a temple.
That cannot be done by building more temples;
that can only be done by you being in touch with the Divine.
And anyway about the major wars,
you need to understand this,
there never was any kind of religious war till about two thousand years ago, okay.
Not even two thousand, about sixteen, seventeen hundred years ago,
there never was,
because in the East,
in this part of the world, there was no such thing as religion.
If you do not know this,
this is the only religion-less culture,
godless culture.
This may be little scary for people
because we have thirty three million gods and goddesses in this country.
That happened when our population was thirty three million.
Since then (Laughs) our population has increased
but we did not create enough gods and goddesses
because of Western influence we started feeling ashamed of gods and goddesses.
If each one of you – there is something called as Ishta Devata,
you can create your own God.
You don’t like any of the things available,
you can make a tree in your house, God. You worship it,
nobody will think it's an odd thing in this country.
There is a rock in your garden you can worship it,
nobody will think it's odd.
You can worship your mother,
you can worship your wife,
you can worship your child,
you can worship a cow,
whatever you want but the important thing is,
there should be devotion in your heart
because if there is no devotion this...
with this much intelligence, this animal will go crazy.
It needs devotion.
Devotion means not about God, about you, isn't it?
Is devotion about you or about God?
Whose quality does it change?
Whose quality does it change,
your quality or God’s quality?
It's about you.
It's about transforming you into a certain level of sweetness
which cannot be contaminated from outside.
This is what devotion means –
that you are devout means you have created a certain sweetness in your emotion
which cannot be contaminated,
which cannot be made bitter by somebody else.
If you love this person,
if this person gets against you, your love becomes poison, isn't it?
Yes or no?
So devotion is that dimension of intelligence
where you know how to manage your sweetness
irrespective of what the world is doing to you and the people are doing to you.
If you don’t have this capability,
you will not go very far in this world, isn't it?
If you have the fear that you could become bitter,
you will only take baby steps in your life.
If you know, ‘No matter what happens this is how I am,
it does not matter what happens to me in this world,
this is how I will be,’
if this assurance you have,
only then you will take full strides into the world,
otherwise you will always take hesitating strides into the world, isn't it?
So there is no – there has never been a religion in this country,
I want you to know.
What you call as Hindu is a geographical identity.
Anybody who is born in the land of Indus is a Hindu.
You can believe in God and be a Hindu;
you can disbelieve in God and be a Hindu.
In your house if you have five people,
five people can worship five different types of gods
and still be okay with each other.
This is not allowed anywhere else,
because here we know that god is man’s making.
It is a device that we have created to touch the Divine.
Yes.
If you do not understand this,
how did all the gods come?
We want to create devices to somehow touch that dimension
which is the basis of creation.
So we evolved a whole technology of God-making -
not just creating forms,
energizing them in such a way that it will assist you to touch that dimension of life.
Everything is same energy.
If you take some filth from the gutter
and throw it at the root of the mango tree it becomes a mango.
The filth and the mango are same, isn't it?
So why don’t you just eat the filth, not the mango?
No, you cannot eat that,
but the mango you want to eat.
This filth has been transformed into such sweetness, isn't it?
What you call as earth that you walk upon is
what is sitting here as your body and my body, isn't it?
Yes or no?
So it is the same thing but it can be transformed into
different dimensions of sweetness and energy and possibility,
though it's the same thing.
So understanding this,
we evolved a whole science of consecration
where we know how to turn a stone into Divine.
It is not a simple process.
It is not just by belief,
it is not just because of… somebody believes it, it will reverberate.
So there is a whole science as to how to energize a space.
(Claps his hands) Simply you can energize this space, make it crackle.
You can take any object and make it.
For example, if you are sensitive you hold this in your hand,
I will just hold it in my hand for one minute and give it to you,
it will feel different.
Only problem is, this object will not be able to hold that energy for too long,
after some time it will dissipate and again become a metal plate.
If you create this form with the necessary care,
you can energize it in a way that it stays for a long period.
So we can consecrate an object –
what is just stone right now will reverberate with a tremendous field of energy.
If people come and just sit there,
their lives are transformed.
It is for this the temples were built.
Temples are not a place of worship.
Nobody is leading a prayer,
there is no philosophy being propounded but they told you one thing,
‘If you go to the temple you must sit there for some time.’
Did they tell...
did they tell you this? Hmm?
Nobody told you, you have to send an application to God,
but they told you, you must sit there for some time.
Now these days you are just touching your bottom to the floor and running away,
that is not the idea. This is like a public... public battery charging place.
If the place is kept alive,
if you sit there your life can transform itself,
if it is properly created.
I am talking about the ancient temples.
Today’s temples, many of them are built like shopping complexes,
probably for the same purpose; that’s a different thing.
But if it's properly done, it is a phenomenally energizing space.
Life can change, simply sitting there.
Questioner: Why is it at the age of twelve that we start living in cycles?
Sadhguru: Oh, that’s because your intelligence
gets hijacked by your hormones.
Hormones means,
you are becoming physically conscious.
Your physicality becomes the main part of who you are.
Because you become so physical,
you naturally become cyclical.
If your identification of the physical is not strong,
your life will not be cyclical
and that identity becomes strong only somewhere between eleven to fourteen for people.
it’s very important children come in touch with some kind of spiritual process.
It need not be something too intense,
at least a little bit.
Not… not religion,
but spiritual process where a child is conscious
before he gets hijacked by a chemical poisoning,
he is conscious that there is something more to me than my body.
This must become an established reality in his mind and his experience.
Then he will handle the physical in a more graceful way,
otherwise,
the physical turns lot of people into brutish existence.
Whether it
In everybody’s life, whether it finds external expression or not,
but within themselves a whole lot of people have a very brutish existence.
Some find expression,
some control the expression,
but it is happening to too many people.
One thing is what happens in the society,
yes it’s of concern.
But my concern is not so much about what happens in the society,
my concern is what happens within the human being
because that’s where human experience is,
that’s where the quality of human being is determined.
If we take care of what happens within an individual human being,
you don’t have to bother about
what happens in a society,
you don’t even have to worry about that.
But because we don’t take care of what happens within an individual human being,
we try to police the society.
It is in some way you are turning the whole world into a prison.
Everything is heavily policed as societies get so… (Laughs)
so-called civilization happens,
terribly policed.
People are proud,
“You call the police, they are there in two minutes flat.”
That’s what happens in the prison.
Even there it takes two minutes. (Laughs)
No.
If we are truly civilized,
we must be able to live here well,
without a police force, isn’t it?
If we are truly civilized, that’s how it should be.
There is no police force in the ashram, you know (Laughs),
just like that.
The whole society could live like that if they were little more conscious.
If little more attention was paid to
what is happening in a individual human being
rather than just being concerned about what’s happening around us.
Without creating better human beings,
we will not create a better society.
It is not possible.
There is no such thing.
Sadhguru: See,
any aspect of life –
these things should not be separated –
what people keep on asking
“What is the connection between life and love,
life and spirituality,
life and sport,”
these are all different dimensions of life.
These are all different expressions of human life
when someone lives intensely.
If you live a tepid life,
if you live a very, you know (Laughs)
a life which doesn’t have any intensity in it,
then it’ll be only about
eating and sleeping and survival process.
If anybody lives intensely
art will come,
music will come,
sport will come,
spiritual process will come
it's bound to come.
How will it not come?
So it's about intensity and involvement.
Where there is intensity, there is involvement.
As I said
when Vivekananda said
“You are closer to God in kicking a ball than in prayer-
see if you become practiced in your prayer
you can be praying and managing your children,
you can be praying and thinking of hundred different things
but in kicking a ball,
if you think about anything else
it’ll not go where you want (Laughs).
You must be absolutely there,
otherwise it won't work.
So it is the intensity and involvement,
without it there is no spiritual process.
Spiritual process is the highest level of intensity and involvement.
If you are involved with life intensely,
you will be naturally spiritual.
Spiritual does not mean looking up or looking down.
Exploring the nature of your existence,
how can you not do that if you are …intense about your life?
If your life matters
how can you not explore the full depth and dimension of who you are
because that is what the spiritual process is?
[Questioner] You said that water has some memory.
Is there any viability to bring that memory level to our life or something?
Is there any scientific evidence or spiritual evidence or some other evidence is available for that?
Basically, as I’m a chemist I'm telling this.
[Sadhguru] Okay. Today, is it okay if I walk down into you?
[Audience] Yes
[Sadhguru] Today, particularly in the last four-and-a-half years, phenomenal amount of research
has gone into water and water potential. This started off inadvertently because of the
the way the usable water in the world is receding per person.
In India, for example, in 1947 how much water an average Indian had, potable water,
today we have only twenty percent of that.
They say by 2025 we’ll have only seven percent of what we had in 1947 per person,
per capita water, only that much will be available.
So because of this, lot of research has gone into water. It went mostly from this line,
but slowly they went deeper and deeper into this and they find – which you must be
being a chemist you must be very much aware of this –
without changing the chemical composition of the water, you can rearrange
the molecular arrangement in such a way that the water will behave
completely in a different way than the way it does, to such an extent,
it's sensitive to this extent, that if I take a glass of water in my hand and
just look at it in a certain way and give it to you, well-being will come to you.
If I look at it another way and give it to you, you will fall sick tonight.
This is no more superstition, this is science.
I’ll tell you an incident that happened.
About seventeen years ago I announced a ninety day program.
Ninety day program for what?
The most fundamental aspect of yoga is considered as Bhuta Shuddhi.
Bhuta Shuddhi means… Bhuta means, you know what?
Pancha bhutas, the five elements in nature - earth, water, fire, air and space –
these are the five elements in nature. It is these five elements which is the
basic components which make this body, which made this planet,
which has made the whole universe, isn't it?
The whole existence, in a way, is a play of these five elements.
So Bhuta Shuddhi is about cleansing these five elements within the system.
How these five elements behave within me will determine the quality of who I am –
based on this, the basic form of yoga is just Bhuta Shuddhi;
everything else is an outcrop of that, taught in various bits and pieces by many people
without understanding the whole… the homogeneity of what it is,
but essentially it's about taking charge of the five elements.
You practice Bhuta Shuddhi for a certain period of time and you achieve what is called as
Bhuta Siddhi, that means you have total control over the five elements,
to such an extent, there is any number of incidents where at the time of death
or at the time of leaving their body, a yogi goes into a room, people lock it from outside,
he goes in and after a few days they open and he's just not there
because he de-materializes himself, he doesn’t want to trouble you with a funeral,
he doesn’t want anybody to carry him to the grave, he just dematerializes his own system.
Seventeen years ago I announced one program for the first time, ninety day program.
Why ninety days is, approximately between forty to forty eight days
the system goes through a certain cycle on the elemental level; this is called a mandala.
Every forty to forty eight days, there is a cycle where the system goes through this cycle.
So this is the reason if you go to any Ayurvedic doctor, or a Siddha vaidya,
he will always give you a medicine for forty days or forty eight days to make use of that cycle,
natural cycle in the body. So I said two mandalas minimum.
Three would be good, but if I say three, many things will happen.
I said, ‘Minimum two mandalas if you do sadhana, you can gain control over your system,
those who want to come, you come,’ and I left the town because I know lot of drama will happen.
Now in a family, husband wants to go for ninety days; wife will do kathak.
Wife wants to go for ninety days, husband acts like Rajinikanth in the house - angry man,
walks up and down like a hero, so many things, drama will happen,
so I don’t want to be there. I said, ‘Those who want to come, you come, it's up to you.’
So after that I came back, you know, to a particular family that I know well.
You know, it's a normal part of our hospitality, when somebody comes home, fist thing is you bring water.
So this lady in the house brought water for me and she's like Kali suddenly, not just kathak,
she's like Kali. I looked at her – she's a nice lady, today she's in the Kali form –
so I looked at her and she offered water to me and I said,
‘Amma, I don’t need this water. I don’t need to drink this water.
You're like Kali right now, I don’t need Kali’s prasadam right now, I'm fine.’
She said, ‘Why, will I poison it?’ I said, ‘No, you don’t have to poison it, it's already done.’
Then I told her, ‘You take a sip from this glass.’ She took a sip from the glass, then I said,
‘Give me the glass to me.’ I held in my hands for two minutes and I just gave it to her,
‘You drink it now.’ She drank one sip and burst into tears and started crying,
she said, ‘It's sweet.’ I said, ‘That’s all the difference it is.’
Now your body is over seventy percent water, if the water in this system
behaves in a sweet manner, will you be at least seventy percent sweet? Hmm?
If the air and earth behaves sweetly within you, will you be at least ninety percent sweet?
Space is never bothering anybody, isn't it?
So the essential science of yoga is about Bhuta Shuddhi, taking charge of the elements within the system.
Once you have control over the elements in the system,
you can also influence the elements around you.
Essentially your whole work with life, your whole work in the world
is just with the elements, always, in a very basic form, isn't it?
So if you have certain mastery over this, you will
what you want, you don’t even have to think about it, your intention
you don’t have to generate a thought, just before you intend, that is how life will work out for you.
So success is not an uphill task. If you raise this to a higher place, if you raise this
to the highest place it can reach, then everything is downhill.
Downhill you can run easily or uphill you can run easily? Definitely downhill, isn't it?
So is there any scientific evidence? There's substantial scientific evidence today
about how the molecular structure of the water can be rearranged
without changing the chemical structure, even with a simple thought or a touch.
The problem is, your grandmother told you this, didn’t she?
Didn’t your grandmothers tell you you should not drink water from anybody’s hands,
do not take food from anybody, there is a certain way you must receive
only if they have good intentions for you. Did they tell you these things?
But when your grandmother said it, the problem is if it goes from the
East it is superstition, if it comes from the West it becomes science.
That’s where it is.
That has to change.
Your generation of people, that’s your responsibility to change that,
that even if it goes from the East, if it is science it's science.
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji, you just mentioned love
and today it is about ‘life and love’
and I would like to know,
for us it is maybe love your family members,
whoever it could be. I… I
Why I ask you this is
because there’re so many versions of this and I really want to get to it.
Some teachers,
some Gurus,
some guides will say you know,
“You can love but you must be detached…”
Sadhguru: Ohoho (Laughs)
Juhi Chawla: …you must love but it cannot be conditional.
It should be unconditional and
So, there’s versions of it,
I just want to know, so have you….
Sadhguru: See, the simple
the simple way of make you keep coming back to me is
to give you something that you cannot do,
to give you a teaching which you can never do.
You must love, but you must be detached
now you have to keep coming back to me for consultation (Laughter),
endlessly.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Sorry.
Sadhguru: I’m saying throw yourself into your love affair and die into it.
Something will happen.
Something worthwhile will happen if you’re willing to die into the process,
not just anything –
whether it’s your work or your life or your love or whatever,
if you do not know how to throw your entire self into it,
you will never know the taste of what it is.
“Love, but be detached” - what
why do you want to love then? (Laughter)
Only because you want to include somebody as a part of your life
part of yourself, that’s why you love.
“No, I love but I… I’m detached.”
This means you have to come back to consultation, every day.
It is like a psychiatrist’s job
everyday you have to come and sit on the couch.
You need treatment and there is a fee (Laughs).
Juhi Chawla: So… Okay all right, so you can love and be attached
Sadhguru: No, no, I didn’t say that (Laughter)
Juhi Chawla: Okay, I’m coming back for consultation, please (Laughter).
So, what did you say?
Sadhguru: I only said,
see what is this need for love in a human being?
You must understand,
a human being constantly,
constantly,
a human being is longing to be something more than what they are right now.
If this finds a simple basic physical expression, we call this sexuality.
Sexuality means just this
physically you’re trying to make something which is not you, a part of yourself.
For a few moments you may succeed.
If you try this mentally, it gets labeled as greed, conquest
or maybe simply shopping
Juhi Chawla: Oh.
Sadhguru: Some people go for conquest with swords and guns,
some people go with cheque books and cash, you know credit cards.
The thing is you want to include something which is not a part of you as yourself –
that is the whole effort.
whether you want money or wealth or you want to occupy a nation, what is it?
Something that is not you, you want to make it yours.
Yours is an effort to make it a part of yourself.
If it happens emotionally,
on the emotional level if you try this,
we call this a love affair.
You’re trying to make somebody who is not a part of you,
a part of yourself emotionally – this is a love affair.
If you do it consciously, we call this yoga.
Yoga means union.
So, all these efforts are fine,
everything has its own beauty but has its own limitations.
When you understand the limitations of all the other methods,
nothing right or wrong about it,
it is just that it will work briefly, it will not work for always.
When you realize that,
you consciously try to include.
When you consciously become an inclusive process, if you sit here,
if you experience everything as yourself
then we say you are a yogi, okay?
So, this is a love affair, successful.
Juhi Chawla: You said love, inclusiveness –
I can’t understand how I can love everybody in this room.
Sadhguru: You cannot.
There are some people you cannot love (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: I can barely see, up there and up there.
So, how is tha
how do you include everybody in your love?
Sadhguru: See because you’re looking at love as something that comes to you
or you yield to the process of love,
only because you appreciate a particular quality
a shape of somebody’s nose or the shape of their mind or their thought or their emotion
or the way they speak or the way they do things or the way they relate to you, something, okay?
There’re many many things.
It is based on something that is acceptable to you.
If they do something that is not acceptable to you,
love crumbles.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Yes.
Sadhguru: Now what I’m saying is,
I want you to look at this
whether love happens to you or hate happens to you, anger happens to you,
misery happens to you, joy happens to you
it only happens within you, isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: It never
People say love is in the air,
no.
Because you are feeling very pleasant in your emotions,
suddenly air feels vibrant.
It always been, you missed it all your life,
now you’re beginning to feel it.
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) Okay. Okay.
Sadhguru: All right?
So, whatever human experience – love or hate,
whatever, whatever – happens only within you.
What I am saying is at least what happens within you must happen by your choice,
consciously you must be able to make it happen.
If you’re able to,
if your experience or what is happening within you is happening by choice,
what is the problem?
It only happens within you.
Love is not a relationship.
A relationship is a different thing.
Love is a certain sweetness of your emotion.
Whether you look at a tree or a dog or a man or a woman or a child or just at the sky,
why can’t you look at it lovingly?
Because it’s not about loving the sky,
it’s about the sweetness of your emotion.
If your emotions are sweet, whatever you look at,
you will look at it in a certain way.
Right now you have nasty emotions, whatever you look at,
you look at it in a different way.
So, you have always associated love with somebody.
No, no, no, this is not about somebody
love is not something that you do,
it is something that you can become.
If you’re willing, you can become love,
you can make your emotion into a very sweet space.
If you make your body very pleasant, it becomes pleasure.
If you sit here, it can be great pleasure
just sitting here and breathing. This is what we’re teaching people,
if you sit… I will show you millions of people,
if they close their eyes, tears of ecstasy will just drip, nothing
simply close your eyes.
Ecstatic they are, bursting
every cell in their body because body has become so pleasant.
If your mind becomes pleasant, we say this is joy.
If your emotions become pleasant, we say this is love.
If your very life energies become pleasant, we say this is blissfulness, this is ecstasy.
If your surroundings become pleasant, we call that success.
Now you’re calling your success with somebody as love, that’s a mistake.
You have a success story with somebody – that is,
you have created pleasantness in the atmosphere between you and let’s say five-ten people around you.
You’re calling that love;
no that is actually success because that needs lots of management.
Juhi Chawla: Yes, it does.
Sadhguru: Yes or no?
Juhi Chawla: Yes it does.
Sadhguru: Yes. But for you to be loving, there is no management.
If you just make your emotions sweet,
your emotions are sweet and it’s beautiful be… be like this.
It’s not about anybody.
If somebody comes, we can share it.
If nobody comes, you can sit here with eyes closed and still be loving, what’s the problem?
It is not about somebody, it’s not an action.
It is not something that you do,
it is something that you can become (Applause).
Juhi Chawla: It’s a… It’s a lovely, idyllic
Sadhguru: It is not idyllic, it is… it is the way it is.
Juhi Chawla: It is… I mean you’d really have to practice this.
Sadhguru: Why?
Juhi Chawla: Because I’m thinking
Sadhguru: See, this is what exactly I’m saying
if it is an action, an action comes to perfection with practice,
only if it’s an action.
I’m saying love is not an act.
Is health an act?
Are you acting healthy right now?
Juhi Chawla: No.
Sadhguru: I know you’re an actor,
but are you acting healthy?
Juhi Chawla: (Laughs) No.
Sadhguru: So health is, because
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: …you have done certain things and health is. Isn’t it?
Juhi Chawla: Oh, we’ve not done certain things
Sadhguru: Oh, we have definite
Juhi Chawla: …we’ve been given
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no. Oh,
we’ve been given, but if you eat bad, if you live bad, you won’t be healthy.
Juhi Chawla: Hmm.
Sadhguru: We’ve done certain things to manage our health.
Similarly, if you do certain things, you can manage the pleasantness of your mind.
If you do certain other things, you can manage the pleasantness of your emotion.
If you do certain other things, you can manage the pleasantness of your very life energies.
This is things that you can do.
Now, what you can do internally, you’re trying to manage externally.
What can be done here within you,
you are trying to manage by creating an atmosphere around you which is a very difficult thing to do,
because outside will never happen hundred percent the way you want it.
To some extent we can manage,
we can’t do all of it by ourselves
because there are many forces involved.
Sadhguru: Anger must be a very beautiful thing because
so many people have taken to it.
It’s like Coca-Cola (Laughs).
There is substantial scientific evidence to show us today,
that if you remain angry for five minutes,
you are literally poisoning yourself.
Anger,
resentment,
hatred,
jealousy –
these are all poisons that you drink,
and you expect somebody else to die.
Life does not work that way.
You are drinking this poison
because your life is an unconscious reaction to everything that happens around you.
if you are a conscious response
to every situation that occurs around you, you would be out of rage.
If you are in rage,
small things may happen your way.
But if you are out of rage,
the universe will work for you.
joy is not a rare happening it is not an achievement or an attainment
it should be the natural ambience of your life
when you remain joyful your whole life is a celebration
(Questioner): So my question is
should we believe in that
like the qualities of vegetarianism,
non-alcoholism,
celibacy,
practice them so that we make our body fit.
So that that kriya of eleven minutes will be more effective?
(Sadhguru): See, this is what I have been saying right through
why even eating is a moral value?
Food is about the body.
We must eat what is suitable for this body
but right now you are talking about making food into a habit.
I want to tell you there is no such thing as good habit or bad habit.
Habit means you’re functioning unconsciously.
If you are functioning unconsciously
that’s the bad thing
because the whole thing about being human is
we are capable of doing things consciously.
That is the beauty of being human
that we can do everything consciously.
What an animal does unconsciously
we can do the same thing consciously.
We can eat unconsciously
or we can eat consciously.
We can breathe unconsciously or we can breathe consciously.
Everything that we can do,
we can do it consciously.
The moment we do something consciously
suddenly that human being looks very refined and wonderful.
Just because somebody walks and speaks consciously,
doesn’t he become a beautiful human being?
Yes or no?
Yes
That’s all.
So why is it that we are trying to develop habits as
if this is a good thing?
Habit means fixed realities where you don’t have to think.
You get up in the morning and it’ll happen to you.
No, don’t try to automize your life.
That is not efficiency.
That is the efficiency of the machine.
This one is supposed to function intelligently and consciously.
Nobody is expecting it to function like a machine.
So about food and stuff
food must be suitable for the body that we eat for
it is for the body.
This is the building material for this body
the food that you’re eating.
What is the appropriate food
unfortunately is all messed up right now.
Traditionally we ate very sensibly in this country
but these thousand years of invasions has brought other kinds of food cultures
and today the national diet is pizza or pasta.
What is it …which is one, I don't know,
both are competing.
So we are losing our sense about food.
It’s definitely time
to look at what is the most suitable thing.
If I go into that food,
it's a very long process
but you must experiment with food,
not just by the tongue,
but by the body.
You eat something today and see
just learn to observe how agile and how active your body feels after eating this food.
If it feels like it wants to go to the grave that’s not good food.
if it feels like it wants to be alive after eating this
except coffee because that’s a stimulant
if you eat food and your body feels very agile and alive
that means it's good food,
body is liking it.
If you eat something, it feels dull that means it's not liking it.
It’s having difficulty with it that’s why it feels dull.
So just on this basis.
There’s a much,
I mean this is the very simplistic way of putting it.
In some way, not the real thing - at least - what happens around?
What are the benefits if one reaches a certain state of consciousness?
There is nobody in the world who doesn't want it.
Did nobody? Everybody wanted.
But the thing is:
Nobody wants to walk the path.
Nobody wants to do what is needed to be done.
But they want to be there.
When I say "you have to walk the path" is it so far away,
is it so hard that you have to get there with great difficulty? No
Of what is within, where is a path? - it's right here
But to turn you around
There is a method, there's a process
What is working against you
is just
Things that work for your well-being actually
Your own mind, your own body. This is what turns against you when you seek something beyond it
From inside they'll turn against you in so many ways
So is it difficult? Is it easy? It is not that... It is just a priority: "how important is it?"
If you become like that: "without knowing this I cannot live"
If that is how important it becomes, then it's not difficult, It's very close.
Because people are off and on, off and on, off and on it seems to be a long way
Anything is like this
Suppose... let's say you have to cook something... let's say you want to bake a cake, or you want to cook some rice
You turn on the stove, turn off the stove... turn on the stove, turn off the stove
It's a long process
And of course they know it won't happen
So this is the story of
majority of the spiritual Seekers
They're off and on, and off and on and off and on
What does it mean to say "I must be only here, there...". That's not it. The priority should not shift.
The priority is set
Slowly everything within you slowly organize itself in that direction
Because the priority is shifting
This life does not know which way to go... it is just confused
Every two minutes if you change the destination on the GPS for sure it does not know where to go isn't it?
So this is what is happening to the most people. This is why spiritual path seems to be otherous long, impossible, unattainable...
All these things simply because people are shifting priorities all the time

(Questioner): In the society we live in organized groups, there will continue
to exist belief systems. that’s so then that means
there will continue to exist conflicts.
(Sadhguru): You are saying they will continue to believe?
Is that what you are saying?
(Questioner): Yeah, belief systems will continue to exist.
(Sadhguru): Are you making a prediction for the future?
(Questioner): Not necessarily it's a prediction.
(Sadhguru): I think if your intelligence functions,
if you allow it to function
your intelligence is incapable of believing anything. Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
Yes?
Your intelligence wants to know;
it is not ready to believe anything actually
but you are forsaking your intelligence
because your fear is so dominant
you feel comfortable in believing.
But if you allow your intelligence to take you ahead
your intelligence doesn’t believe anything,
it wants to know everything, isn't it?
Yes?
Is that the nature of your intelligence?
So, if you allow your intelligence to function
then you will see
all your beliefs will just fall apart
because you know you don’t know,
isn't it?
But it takes a lot of pressure
to make you admit it (Laughs)
but actually you know that you don't know, isn't it?
Do you know?
Yes.
Then what's the problem?
You don’t have to admit it to anybody,
at least to yourself
can't you admit
okay I don't know’?
If you don't know
do you see you have to use your intelligence?
Do you see this?
See, suppose let's say its pitch dark.
You don't know how the ground is.
Do you see how alert you will become,
every step that you take?
That’s how it is –
when you do not know everything becomes bright,
it is just looking.
Your intelligence is all hyped up and looking.
When you assume ‘I know’
everything settles down and you go on with your stupid life, isn't it?
Is it alright if you use your intelligence?
Do I have your permission?
Hum?
Is it okay for you to use your intelligence
or is it against God?
It's alright.
I am asking you
is it against God if you employ your intelligence
and live your life?
No.
If God was against intelligence
he wouldn’t have created it, isn't it?
If the creator was against you functioning intelligently
it wouldn’t have been given to you,
isn't it?
So if you employ your intelligence
you will see
your intelligence is not willing to believe anything,
it is only the fear in you.
Don’t you ever believe that it is bhakthi.
No bhakthi,
just fear which is making you believe things, isn't it?
That’s why you made it ‘bhaya bhakthi.’ (Laughs)
There is no bhaya and bhakthi together.
If bhakthi comes
I am sorry,
you know what's bhaya bhakthi?
Hum yourself no?
Bhaya means fear,
bhakthi means devotion.
See, if devotion comes fear will not exist in you.
If fear exists that means devotion has not come
but you made a hybrid.
You want to have both, bhayabhakthi.
There is no bhaya bhakthi,
just bhaya, only fear.
No fear and devotion cannot exist together,
please see this.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru,
I want to experience this life within me to the maximum.
So in addition to my kriyas,
which I do every day without fail,
what else should I do
to take this experience to the maximum?
I want to experience that magic of life you talk about.
Thank you.
Sadhguru: You must live!
So, what does it need to live?
Not live it out,
live it in. (Laughs)
People think if they want to live,
they want to live it out.
Party every day.
Party every day philosophy works for some time, you know.
If you are eighteen
You’re not, okay.
I’m not… I’m not trying to
If you are eighteen, (Turns his face to the other side, covering his face with one hand)
(Laughter)
then you may last five days, sixth day you’ll be down.
If you’re thirty, you’ll last for three days,
fourth day you’ll be down.
If you are fifty - two days you’ll be down.
If you’re sixty, in the party you’ll go down (Laughter).
So nothing
I have nothing against the party,
it’s not very practical, that’s all.
And it’ll become the most
monotonous horror after some time
party every day.
Hmm?
So what should I do?
The kriya is only an impetus.
It is not an end in itself.
The kriya is trying to enhance your energies.
Daily, every day without fail, I heard that
and I’ll remember that and I’ll… (Laughter) Hmm?
Okay.
Now the kriya can function in different dimensions,
when we teach it in the program
we will teach it in such a way it is safe for a beginner.
There’s a safety issue always.
If you’re going to make somebody climb up this tree,
if it is a five-year-old kid
you will make him go that much,
if it’s a ten-year-old kid that much, you know.
There’s a safety issue.
So, it is taught in a certain way.
When you exhaust that dimension,
which will take a certain period of time for people
depends,
some people exhaust that quickly,
some people exhaust that over a lifetime,
the possibility that it offers just in that dimension.
And it is also an inbuilt mechanism
that if you hit the full depth and dimension of the kriya
in a certain a period of time
and stay there steadily,
it’ll open up a new possibility by itself.
It’s… It’s designed like that,
the software is designed like that,
that step-by-step it’ll hold you at a certain place for a certain time,
when it feels your physiology and psychology is stable enough,
it’ll move you to next level of intensity.
If you’re not willing to wait
for this process to unfold by itself naturally,
then I would say
once a year
or twice a year
or thrice a year
or the whole year, that’s your choice,
you can make it your choice,
you fix a time for sadhana
full time sadhana,
maybe a week,
maybe fifteen days whatever you can afford in your life.
You come, stay here,
one week sadhana,
fifteen days sadhana, whatever
that suits and fits into your life,
you do that.
For you I would say twice a year –
full-time sadhana.
A few days in a year is only for sadhana,
not for anything else.
Not morning sadhana, evening sadhana,
just twenty-four hours sadhana for a short span of time.
If you invest this kind of time,
you can do that unfolding much, much faster,
rather than allowing it to mature at its own natural pace,
you can push it.
You should do that.
And, of course,
being in a state of devotion is very conducive.
You can every day sit like this
and do it like an exercise.
Don’t take such vows,
‘Till the last day of my life, I will do it.’
Do it today,
you’re committed only for one day.
And see this day that this could be your last day.
Possible?
Possible or no?
Possible. We’re not wishing it,
but possible.
So this could be your last day.
Do your kriya like this could be your last day.
Hmm?
You’ll unfold much faster
’cause now you’re thinking next eighty-two years
I’m going to do it,
so the inner mechanism is thinking
okay, she’s got a lot of time (Laughs).
You do it like today is the last day,
then it’ll hurry up a little bit.
Or if we find you’re stable enough,
suitable enough,
we will step in and tweak it up
in a completely different way.
There are many things to do,
but the most important thing is to
do the kriya with a certain sense of devotion and offering
rather than like an exercise.
If you do it like an exercise you’ll get health benefits,
but if you want to explode,
then you must take away your inner structures,
then it’ll burst very easily.
Shyama: Pranam Sadhguru.
I have a question about Bhuta Shuddhi.
We speak about cleansing of the five elements.
Cleansing them of what,
why do they become impure
and what is the difference between
Pancha Bhuta Aradhana which happens on Shivaratri
and the Bhuta Shuddhi process
which we learn as a part of Hata Yoga?
Sadhguru: The five elements,
just five,
if they have to play so much mischief
it’s not one or two manifestations,
trillions of manifestations
if all this has to happen,
if it does not acquire
other qualities or possibilities,
there is no way with five you can create so many.
They are naturally receptive in nature.
The air that you breathe,
the food that you eat,
the water that you drink
we will leave the other two
because you don’t have much experience of those two.
Today, we know
we can influence them
just with thought, emotion, intension or energy
we can change the quality of the water,
we can change the quality of the air and the food that we eat,
just with our intention or emotion or thought process.
So
the five elements within you
which makes this body are deeply, deeply influenced
a certain layer of information,
which generally referred to as the Karmic substance gathers;
without it the elements would not behave in a particular way within you.
It would be same
every human being would have been same
if there was no specific information.
see, if you eat a banana you become a woman
the banana becomes a woman.
Somebody here eats, it becomes a man,
if a cow eats it becomes a cow - same banana.
Banana is not so intelligent to make itself into a man, woman, cow, whichever animal consumes.
It is a certain amount of information within you,
which transforms a banana into
a woman or a man or a cow or an elephant or whatever for that matter.
What you call as myself,
individual self is essentially a certain volume of information
and the fundamental way that it is stuck on to you
is through the elements
because there is nothing here apart from the elements.
So, cleansing it is also about cleansing it
and making it free of the accumulated information
or the karmic substance.
If this is not done
then you will be a strong individual
but you will never know
how to breach this boundary that you have set for yourself.
This is not some boundary set by the existence;
this is a boundary that you’ve set for yourself.
If you cannot cross the boundary that you set up,
that’s a foolish way to live, isn’t it?
You set up a boundary without knowing why
and you can’t cross it after sometime
and you start claiming
“This is how I am!”
This is… you know this is a common statement you hear everywhere,
you ask them to cross some limitation
“No! This is how I am.”
This is not how you are
this is what you made yourself to be.
Now, cleansing becomes relevant
when you want to extend yourself beyond these boundaries
when freedom and liberation becomes the goal of your life.
If you want to be a concrete ball
there is no need to cleanse,
there’s no need to cleanse at all.
So concretization of karmic processes will make you rigid.
Rigidity will bring enormous amount of suffering,
enormous.
You don’t need a calamity to happen;
you are a calamity by yourself.
You do not need any external assistance,
this is called self-help.
Most people
when it comes to their suffering
they are all on self-help.
You know
Nobody need to poke them.
When was it last time that somebody physically poked you?
Hmm?
When was it last time?
Maybe when you were in school
somebody did this to you.
After that nobody is bothered about doing anything like that.
Most of you, almost all of you have never
been poked with a dagger or a sword
at the most a pin or a finger
nothing more.
But for most of you in the last ten, fifteen or twenty-five years
nobody has ever even poked you with a finger
because everybody is weary of you.
Who’s
So how much
if you look at the volume of suffering that you go through -
anger, fear, hatred, jealousy, whatever else you go through,
misery whatever-
how much has been caused from external agencies,
how much is caused by you
if you look at it,
it is a miniscule percentage
which has been caused from external agencies.
“No, no, no my mother-in-law said this,
my boss said that” -
they are saying what they’re saying
but they are not poking you.
Physical suffering has not been caused to you from outside unless you’re from Middle-East
For most of you such things have not happened
but rest is all your own making.
This is simply because
the imprint is so deep
that you behave in predetermined compulsive ways.
A thousand times the same situation has happened
but still the next time it happens
you almost react the same way -
it takes a certain amount of awareness,
certain amounts of shaking you up to respond in a different way.
So, what’s called Bhuta Shuddhi is
to do it in the most fundamental level.
If we cleanse your mind
if we clean it in the morning,
by afternoon you will have a whole new world again
It’s really waste.
This is why
no… no significance or no importance is given in the yogic system
towards your psychological structure
what you think, what you feel they don’t care
because if you change it today again
within few hours you will change it back into something else.
We are only interested in the body;
this is why yoga calls everything as body
physical body, mental body, energy body like this
but no mind
because the psychological activity that’s happening
towards which you have given enormous importance
is of no consequence or significance.
Depending upon the type of information imprinted within you.
Whatever is your karma,
whatever is your sanskara,
that is how you think,
that’s how you feel,
that’s how your emotions happen,
everything happens that way.
So we are interested in handling the root.
If you prune the tree
it will sprout back with vengeance
no point
pruning it.
If you handle the root it’ll be gone.
So the very root of karmic imprint is in the elements,
that is the most fundamental space.
It takes much more than handling other aspects.
So, generally …because most people are not interested in absolute transformation.
They just want a little change,
they don’t want to lose themselves.
Bhuta Shuddhi means you want to lose yourself
whether it’s good, bad, ugly, beautiful, it doesn’t matter
you want to lose everything that you have built,
so that the Creator’s creation will stand up and shine within you.
It’ll take a certain amount of work
the Bhuta Shuddhi that’s been taught to you is very basic.
If you want to do more serious forms of Bhuta Shuddhi
it will mean
it becomes your entire life,
it’s not something that you do on the side.
So even if you do a very minor version of Bhuta Shuddhi,
you will see
the change that happens in you is permanent
there is no tendency to fall back
and that’s important.
Otherwise everybody changes for three days
and again they fall back into the rut.
After sometime that will not happen
when you assist whatever else you’re doing with the Bhuta Shuddhi practice.
Nadha Aradhana… I mean the Pancha Bhuta Aradhana is another matter,
that’s a ritual.
For those who are not willing to do sadhana
just to give them some benefit,
that’s the beauty of a ritual,
that’s a limitation of a ritual.
Somebody else can conduct a ritual for you –
you don’t have to do any sadhana, just sit there and benefit from that
but then only if they conduct, you have it
otherwise you don’t have it.
Suppose we don’t do Pancha Bhuta Aradhana, you don’t have it.
So, the ritual is always like this,
it is beautiful because
people who do not know anything about it
they can still benefit from it.
At the same time if those who conduct,
do not conduct it properly
it will not happen to you.
If they do not conduct it at all,
it will never be available to you.
But if you do Bhuta Shuddhi practice by yourself
if you’re willing you can keep it up
and you will see as time progresses
its impact is undeniable.
Above all,
whatever it does,
however small the practice is,
whatever it does, there is no turning back.
That’s a very aspect of Bhuta Shuddhi.
If you
if you
let’s say six months you do asana,
another one year you give it up,
everything will back
will be back as it was.
Six months you did pranayam
if it’s a powerful process like Shakti Chalana Kriya, if you did,
its impact will be there
but of… at a certain period of time
if you don’t do it for a certain period of time,
again it’ll turn back.
You meditate, you do Shoonya meditation for some time -
if you don’t do it for a certain period of time
slowly it’ll turn back.
But that is not the nature of Bhuta Shuddhi.
Bhuta Shuddhi if you do
nothing seems to be happening
because it’s very fundamental and it’s slow
but whatever happens, it will not turn back.
It stays with you,
as long as you hold this body it stays with you
it will not go
because it’s on a very fundamental level.
That’s the significance of Bhuta Shuddhi.
Sadhguru: Death is not something that happens to you sometime in future.
It's happening to you all the time.
If you are unaware,
you are ignorant
it comes to you sometime;
you do not know when but it’ll come.
If you are aware
in every moment
both life and death are involved.
If you as much as breathe little more consciously
you will notice
with every inhalation there is life,
with every exhalation there is death.
If you are not getting the point
just do the next inhalation and do not
next exhalation and do not take the next inhalation
you will get the point.
Every moment,
even beyond the breath,
every moment it is happening.
It's like the ticking of the clock
life and death,
life and death,
life and death.
It's all the time happening.
One who is aware of this
will naturally become aware
there is no such thing
as life and death.
Life is death;
and death is life;
they are not different.
It is only a question of
the womb,
the crawling out,
growing up,
taking the loan from the planet
and putting it back
but it's just life
or it's just death.
We need not have invented two words for this.
It’s just one thing.
We can call it ‘Da-life’
because they are not two different things.
It is out of a very gross sense of unawareness about the life process
because the wonderful gifts that have been showered upon humanity
we are using them like toys;
it feels this way.
This mind,
this brain
capable of incredible things
but we are using it
like a toy
I think people enjoy toys, isn't it?
A large percentage of humanity is so suffering the mind
that slowly it has become fashionable
to teach you to become no mind.
Took millions of years
to evolve to this state of mental capability;
now we are talking about no mind
because a no mind is better than a crazy mind,
but a conscious mind is a fabulous thing.
Why would anybody want to give this up
because they do not know how to handle it?
If you knew how to handle it
if you knew how to handle it
you wouldn’t want to get rid of this.
People are seeking peace.
I don't know
if you walk straight on this pathway through the school and beyond
there we have some very peaceful creatures.
Did you see them?
You didn’t see the ashram cows?
No?
Please go, you must see them.
They are really peaceful,
especially at this time of the day they are munching
what they ate through the day and
very peaceful;
more peaceful than lot of saints.
Just a full stomach - so much peace.
Just grass;
see this is all you have to do
because not much of a mind;
even to create turmoil you need a mind,
with certain capability?
So
this mind has become a problem
only because of so many silly assumptions we have made about life.
So many kinds of camouflages we have put on life
not seeing it just the way it is.
All kinds of inventions about it;
too many philosophies;
too many ideologies
oh I am going too far.
Lot of people are just living by
some silly slogan that they read somewhere.
This happened in an African village.
There was a man eating lion
bothering
a certain village;
grabbing men, women and children off and on
and having… making breakfast of them
or dinner
So they did not know how to deal with this lion
because it was a very ferocious animal.
So they called the big time celebrated hunter from Zimbabwe;
his name was Kola Mandell Smite.
Kola Mandell Smite is a big man,
carried a big gun and is a big game hunter;
big on all things.
So they invited him for a …big fee.
He came;
he walked around the village for three days,
the lion didn’t turn up.
He had other contracts,
so he said,
‘My time, precious time is going away.
So let me do one thing.
Bring one of your cows here.’
They brought a cow.
With one slash of his hunting knife,
big hunting knife slashed the animal’s throat
and then skinned the animal,
took the hide,
fresh hide and put it over his body as camouflage,
hid his gun in this hide
and went and started pretending like he is grazing upon the field.
So the villages were really impressed with this
and they were all waiting that he’ll get the lion today.
Then they heard blood curling screams from Kola Mandell Smite
and all of them ran to see what happened
and they found a strange situation
that the bull was upon him
He started screaming,
‘You idiots! Why did you let the bull loose?’
So you don't know which way it’ll get you.
Death is like this;
you don't know which way it’ll get you
unless you have become aware
that what you call as life
and what you call as death
are not two separate things.
One who does not embrace death will not know life at all.
If you sit here,
‘I don’t want to die,
I don’t want to die,
I don’t want to die…’ -
all that’ll happen is you will not live.
You will anyway die
but you will not live for sure.
It's not that I want to die today
but if I do,
it's alright with me.
I’ll do everything to protect myself,
to nurture myself,
to take care of myself
but if I have to die today it's okay with me.
Now I can step out and live;
otherwise I cannot live.
Basava,
a Kannada Saint,
a great poet,
a fabulous devotee,
a very beautiful devotee,
a sage and a mystic
wrote hundreds of poems
which constantly he treaded
Many, many things he wrote about death;
lot of things about life
but many things about death.
this is a translation;
it loses its
some of the beauty of poetry
but you get the meaning.
Basava said,
“Sacrificial lamb brought to the festival
Eats up the green leaf brought for decorations
Sacrificial lamb brought for the festival
Eats up the green leaf brought for the decoration
Not knowing a thing about the kill
Not knowing a thing about the kill
It wants only to fill its belly,
born that day to die that day
But tell me,
did the killer survive,
O kudallasangama deva”
it is just that for the ignorant death comes
for those who are aware death doesn't come
death is
As life is, death is
Sadhguru: In this culture, the rivers
we have not seen them as just water bodies,
we have seen them as life-giving gods or goddesses.
To a thinking mind which can think only within the limitations of its logic,
this may sound foolish or very rudimentary.
“Well, a river is a river, how is it a goddess?”
Such a person, if you lock him up in the room without giving water for three days,
then if you show him a glass of water,
he will bow down to that glass of water (Laughs)
not to the river, just a glass of water (Laughs).
Because what we call as water,
what we call as air,
what we call as food,
what we call as the earth that we walk upon
these are not commodities,
these are life-making material.
In this culture, we never worshipped unknown gods somewhere.
There’s never been a God up there (Gestures) in India.
All the gods that we worship are people who walked this geography at some time.
Not somebody who lived in heaven,
somebody who walked this land.
Whether you take Shiva or Rama or Krishna or whatever,
they all walked this land,
went through trials and tribulations that every human being goes through and much more.
Only thing about them is no matter what kind of situations happen about them or around them,
no matter what kind of challenges life threw at them,
they did not deviate from their inner nature.
They did not succeed many times,
they did not miraculously achieve some great result,
they failed actually in their lives.
But they did not deviate from the nature of how a human being should be within himself.
What was happening outside,
whatever turmoils happened
What you call as Mahabharat is one great turmoil from beginning to end,
all kinds of things ending in a terrible disastrous war
but still one man remained untouched,
actively involved but untouched.
So it is for that, that we worship them,
not because of their success,
not because of some miraculous powers,
not because they landed from heaven,
they all had… they all were normal births for their mothers,
nobody landed from the sky
and they walked this land like all of us,
went through everything that all of us go through and much more.
But still we worship them because they remained untouched.
In many ways, a river represents that,
that it doesn’t matter what kind of people touch it.
Because of its nature of flowing, it remains pure and always there.
So we never saw rivers as water bodies,
we never saw rivers as just geographical happenings,
we always saw them as life-making fundamentals for our life
because over seventy-two percent of our body itself is water.
Over seventy percent of the planet itself is water.
If we are looking for life, we look for a drop of water first.
So having said this,
the fundamental science about transcending
or transforming human life is called bhuta shuddhi
that is, cleansing of the five elements.
This is a miraculous process in the sense,
this whole universe,
this body,
this planet,
this solar system,
the whole universe,
the variety of lives and forms everywhere,
all this has been created just with five elements.
Not with five million, just five.
And how magically these five have come together in billions of ways
and one is absolutely unique compared to the other
and all of them have been made only with five elements.
So, if one wants to transcend their own physical nature,
the most fundamental and the most effective way of doing this is
going through the process of bhuta shuddhi.
The whole yogic science is an evolution out of bhuta shuddhi process
that is doing things with your elements.
If you take charge of your elements,
everything is in your realm, everything is in your control.
Water is seventy-two percent,
twelve percent is earth,
six percent is air,
four percent is fire,
the remaining is akash.
If we take charge of this (these?) four elements – or five elements for that matter
everything is in our control.
One who masters five elements is considered master of the universe.
Water is predominant because seventy-two percent is water.
If we keep the waters in this body, pure and good,
health, well-being is simply taken care of.

Sadhguru: The most beautiful thing about time is
if you do something it passes by;
if you do nothing it passes by;
if you are joyful it passes by;
if you are miserable it passes by;
its absolutely just no matter who you are
how you are
for everyboy it passes at the same speed.
Only thing is our experience of the time could be different
depending upon how intensely we live
or how slack we are.
If you’re very slack with life
it looks like time is passing by very slowly.
If you’re very intense,
time just flies by
but in reality time is happening to all of us at the same pace.
These cycles of time
whether it’s minutes or hours or days or months or years that go by,
these cycles of time
Anything that’s cyclical is naturally repetitive
but anything that is cyclical
also has a centrifuge or a centrifugal force,
a force which is always trying to go away at a tangent from the circle.
If you ride this centrifugal force of time,
we say you’re spiritual.
If you are caught up in the cycle of time
then that’s being material,
if you’re crushed by the cycles of time
then we say you are a suffering creature.
It is the same cycle,
either you can be crushed by the cycle
or you can trapped in the cycle
or you can ride the cycle.
To ride the cycles of time
not to be trapped in it,
definitely not to be crushed by it.
Time is crushing experience for a lot of people.
Hmm?
Yes?
Anything cyclical has this ability
that it can crush you
or it can trap you
or you can ride it.
In the yogic way of looking at things
we see time
time is referred to as Kala.
Kala means both time and space.
Kala means darkness.
Darkness means that which does not stop light,
you understand what I’m saying?
If there is light going by you won’t see it.
Only if it’s stopped by something you see it.
So that which does not stop light is called darkness.
So that which does not stop light is empty space.
So both space and time are referred to as Kala
because they are not seen as two different entities.
Only because there is time,
space is possible.
Because there is time
you can move from point A to point B.
So there is space.
If there was no time,
there was no way to move.
The general perception is because there is space
there is time
But I don’t see it that way.
Because there is time, there is space.
Now
there is time
which happens because of cycles.
The planet spins once, it’s a day.
The moon goes around the planet, it’s a month.
The planet goes around the sun, here we are today (Laughter).
The cycles of time are one dimension of time.
There’s another dimension of time
which is not
which is beyond the cyclical nature.
This we call as the great time.
It’s called the Mahakala.
There is time and there is greater time.
Even when there are no cycles there is time.
But where there is no cyclical movement,
there is no physical happening.
Everything that’s physical in the universe
from what is atomic to what is cosmic,
everything is cyclical.
If there are no cycles happening
there is no physical possible.
When I said, if you take a tangent
or if you take the centrifugal to ride away from the cycles of time
that means being spiritual.
It’s in this context
that we know the cycles of time
only because of physical reality.
If we could measure
If we could measure
what is the speed of an electron around the proton and neutron,
we could keep time,
atomic time.
But a bit too much for us
so we measured the planets.
How much time it takes to go around the sun
they said it’s a year.
We went little further down to days and hours and minutes and seconds
but all of them are cycles of the physical existence.
If there is no physical existence,
we would not know anything that’s cyclical.
If we did not know what is cyclical movement,
we would not know the cyclical nature of the time
but
before existence manifested in its physical nature
there was time.
This is called Mahakala,
that is, an eternal space.
You’re not watching my words.
I’m saying an eternal space.
When there was no movement,
when everything was still,
there was time,
but nothing cyclical happening.
That dimension of time into which everything dissolved,
and from which everything sprang up,
when certain energy touched it,
it took to cyclical movement.
When cyclical movement happened, physical happened.
When physical happened, we could measure time.
Otherwise time was just space.
So the word kala means both time and space.
“Sadhguru we came for a party (Laughter),
and here you’re going at us like this (Few laugh).”
Is it...
it is important to know or rather
it’s important to touch and experience a dimension
which is not cyclical in nature.
Because what is cyclical is inevitably repetitive.
What is cyclical inevitably runs itself out at some point.
It runs itself down.
Anything that’s cyclical cannot be forever
because it needs a certain amount of kinetic energy
which is going to expend itself.
When a human being touches a dimension which is not cyclical in nature,
suddenly there is a new quality,
a quality which is beyond all qualities -
not good,
not bad,
not this, not that.
Simply.
Like existence.
There’s nothing high about it,
nothing low about it.
It’s just that you have moved from the surface to the source.
Not that it solves all your problems,
it’s just that you won’t know what is a problem (Laughter).
This... I said something about the India situation
and this quote is making rounds,
even reached the Prime Minister and he was laughing about it.
I said, “For every solution there is a problem (Laughter).”
Just see -
for every solution, somebody has a problem, isn’t it (Laughter)?
For... People may think for every problem there is a solution.
But when you don’t see any problems,
when you see only solutions,
some people have problems with the solutions (Laughter).
I don't know.
“What shall I do?
What shall I do with myself
which is all and nothing at once?
What shall I do with myself
which is me and you at once?
What shall I do?”
Is this a problem or is this a solution?
There may be a space where there are no problems and no solutions,
just existence.
For someone who pops out of nothing
and pops out into nothing,
what is the problem and what is a solution, I’m asking (Laughs)?
Hello?
You popped up from nothing,
you’re gonna pop out into nothing.
In this little space and time,
what is the problem and what is the solution?
I want you to figure this out (Laughs).
Hello?
What is the problem?
Hmm?
Sadhguru: There’s really no problem, no solution actually
but there are so many problems (Laughter).
“Sadhguru, we don’t know where you are living (Laughter),
where I am living, there are so many problems (Laughter).”
I am also living among the kind of people that you’re living with (Laughs).
Yes,
same sort (Laughter).
The question is just what are you rooted into?
If your rooting is just your physical body,
some things are problems,
some things are solutions.
If you’re rooted into a psychological framework,
everything is a problem (Laughter).
If you’re rooted into the existence,
nothing is a problem,
nothing is a solution,
everything is an experience of life.
Hmm?
Everything is an experience.
“If I die tomorrow?”
That is also a very good experience.
We don’t wish it tomorrow
but if it comes, that is also an experience.
Hmm?
You don’t like it?
Whether you like it or not, it happens.
Yes?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whether you like it or not, it happens.
Not that we’re wishing it tomorrow,
but if it happens tomorrow,
what the hell (Laughter)?
We don’t want it tomorrow,
“still got miles to go before I sleep,
miles to go before I sleep…” (Referring a poem by Robert Frost) (Laughter).
We don’t know how many miles you will go, but
if you look at life in its full depth and dimension,
life is a certain amount of space.
If you look at life in a linear fashion,
life is a certain amount of time.
If you look at life from your psychological perspective,
life is a certain number of problems.
Every day I’m meeting all sorts of people,
thousands of them.
How many varieties of problems they have means it’s unbelievable.
For sure for every solution there is a problem (Laughter).
Birth is a problem,
death is a problem,
in between series of problems.
Serial inventors of problems.
One cycle is ending, a new year is coming.
It’s a choice that you have to make.
Are you going to invest your thought and emotion and energy
in making up problems
or making up solutions?
Or simply enjoying life for what it is?
It’s a choice that one has to make.
“Oh, this is my resolution
I won’t make any more problems (Laughter).”
To make resolutions, first you need a constitution.
Do you have a constitution?
Hello?
You don’t have a constitution?
No,
like a nation has a constitution,
a religion has a constitution too.
One advantage of the constitution of the nation is,
we can amend it periodically.
The constitution of the religions cannot be amended.
It’s fixed (Laughter).
Any change means violence will happen (Laughs).
If you suggest an amendment, they will kill you.
That is their amendment (Laughter).
The national constitution,
constitutions which make nations,
it is open to debate and amendment.
I’m asking you,
you as a person,
do you have a constitution?
No, no, no, you have.
What you like,
what you don’t like,
“this’s what I will do,
this’s I won’t do,
I’m a morning person, I’m a evening person (Laughter),
I’m a Whatsapp person, I’m a e-mail person,
I’m a Facebook person” (Laughter).
There are constitutions - individual constitutions.
Maybe not written down, but it’s there, isn’t it?
If you can pass a resolution, there must be a constitution.
If there is no constitution,
how do you pass a resolution about it?
So there is...
Once you have a constitution, you are not a life,
you are an institution.
If you’re living in an institution, you know what it means (Laughter).
It means you’re a nutcase (Laughter).
Yes.
No, no, no, not everybody.
Either you’re a nutcase or you’re a spiritual aspirant (Laughter).
Yes.
You are a seeker of sanity
or you’re a seeker of liberation (Laughs).
One of these things means you live in a institution.
“So, what resolution should I take for the new year?”
All resolutions are impositions.
Where there is no consciousness,
where there is no awareness to know life,
from the
from the aliveness of what it is,
you wanna fix it.
If you pass a resolution today,
in some way you’re making sure
that you will not be aware for the next one year.
Because awareness means a spontaneous response to life,
moment-to-moment.
As a... resolution means fixed, pre-fixed.
If you pre-fix your life,
whether it’s done by you or done by somebody else,
if...
if your government passes a resolution –
all of you must hang upside down
In India we would say a tamarind tree.
Here, where shall we hang you from?
Tch.
What’s the famous tree from which they hang people?
No particular tree?
Hmm?
Where to find a oak tree? (Laughs).
Hmm?
Where to find a big oak tree to hang from?
It’s difficult to find them.
In India we say a tamarind tree for a particular reason (Laughs).
So let’s say
your government passes a resolution that all of you must hang upside down from a tree,
whatever tree –
we’ll give you the choice of the tree –
will you suffer this,
will you protest this,
will you rebel against it or no?
Hmm?
Meditators: Yes
Sadhguru: Yes.
Whether your government passes the resolution or you pass the resolution,
it’s not any different.
You’re trying to achieve something by force.
Anything that you try to do by force
feels like you’re hanging upside down.
Yes or no?
You want to be like this but you want to do this,
you will feel like you’re hanging upside down.
When you hang upside down,
you will feel like rebelling against it.
So naturally,
within three days your resolutions will become dissolutions (Laughter).
Otherwise you suffer hanging upside down.
Very few suffer the entire year.
Some will dissolve this in three days,
some in three weeks,
some in three months.
But the very fact that they need one more resolution by the year end is
a proof that did not… did not last the year.
So there is no need to take any resolutions but
A resolution is made because you want to do something
that you naturally don’t... not inclined towards.
But the simple thing is...
are you naturally inclined to be joyful or miserable?
Meditators: Joyful.
Sadhguru: That was only five people (Laughter).
Are you naturally inclined to be joyful or miserable?
Meditators: Joyful.
Sadhguru: The little ones?
Meditators: Joyful.
Sadhguru: So, you can consciously
you can make an attempt to be conscious
that joyful is my natural inclination.
So how joyful will I be in the coming year?
Just keep accounts.
Hmm?
See, lot of people who’re doing business,
they think they’re keeping accounts only for the sake of IRS (Laughter).
No, no,
you keep accounts not for the sake of IRS,
because if you do not keep accounts,
you do not know whether you’re making profit or loss.
That’s the idea of accounts, isn’t it?
Whether you’re moving forward or backward,
to know this,
you need an account book.
Why don’t you keep an account book?
At the end of the day, just check,
“Am I little more joyful today than yesterday?”
Tch,
if you had done this since you were five years of age,
you would have been ecstatic by now.
Profit side. (Gestures)
Became like this because you never kept accounts.
One day you checked when it became very acute.
Then you see you are in a big loss (Laughs).
Every day,
every month, just keep accounts,
“Am I becoming more joyful or less joyful?”
There’re only two things.
How joyful are you
and how much joy do you give to people around you?
This you can keep accounts.
Hmm?
If you keep accounts of this...
People are keeping accounts of their money,
as if they’re gonna carry it with them.
The real wealth of life is how joyful you are,
how wonderful is your experience of life?
Joy is not a goal by itself
but it’s a necessary ambiance for life.
If you don’t set this one ambiance,
then whatever you have is just going waste.
Hmm?
You may have health, that’s going waste,
because (Laughs) there are more people on this planet
who’re healthy and miserable
than unhealthy and miserable.
At least if you’re
At least if you’re unhealthy, you got a good enough excuse
for your misery.
Hmm?
You’re healthy and miserable, there is no excuse.
I want you to just understand this,
it’s just not smart to be miserable (Laughs).
Hmm?
This happened
a lady was driving...
Tch and then she had a flat tire.
She had never really done this -
this changing tire business
but she read the instruction manual,
she put the jack and lifted up the car,
she undid the wheel,
with great difficulty she pulled out the heavy wheel from the boot
and was trying to fix it
and these four nuts that she had,
she had kept it in the hub cap
and with her high heels she was struggling
and she stepped on the hub cap
and all the four nuts flew in different directions.
So she put the new tire, but she had no nuts.
Tch.
Then she was cursing and wondering and miserable,
what the hell to do now?
And she was little nervous
because she was hearing all kinds of noises from a mental institution
which was across the street (Laughter).
Then on the third floor,
there was a young man looking out of the window,
watching this lady.
Then he said,
“Hey lady, look here.
All you need to do is,
take one-one nut out of the three wheels
and put the three nuts on this,
you can drive to the gas station.
With three nuts you can drive, no problem.”
She did that,
and she got the car down on the road,
then she looked up at him and said,
“You’re so smart, why are you here (Laughter)?”
He said, “I may be nuts but I’m not stupid” (Laughter).
It’s all right to be little crazy,
but you don’t have to be stupid.
All the so-called smart people who’ve become (Gestures),
like they’re practicing a posture for their grave (Laughter), you know?
When I look at lot of people,
I think they’re practicing (Laughter).
They’re doing pretty well (Laughter).
But what they don’t understand is,
it doesn’t take practice.
When you die, it happens (Laughter).
Yes?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Do you think you need to practice?
No (Laughter).
Because you can’t improve death with practice
but you can improve life with practice.
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: However you do life,
you can still do it better.
Yes?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: But death happens super efficiently for everybody.
You can’t improve upon that.
You think you can improve?
No.
You don’t have to practice your final posture right now (Laughter).
It’ll come naturally, believe me.
It’s not like life, there’re no difficulties there.
It’ll come very naturally.
You will do perfectly well in the grave (Few laugh).
You don’t have to have any doubt,
it doesn’t need any preparation.
When you die, you will get it.
Hmm?
But now with life,
there is so much to do and more.
How much ever you do,
there’s something more to do about life, isn’t it?
If you want to be at it,
the fundamental ambiance is that you’re joyful.
Otherwise, you will get this tremendously intelligent idiotic question –
“to be or not to be” (Laughter)?
Yes.
Intellectually seems very profound,
but it’s the most idiotic question.
You don’t have to decide not to be,
it will happen.
There were many idiots like you,
countless number of idiots like you on this planet who’re gone.
They don’t have to worry about to be or not to be now.
Anyway they’re not to be.
This is our time on this planet.
Yes?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: This is our time on this planet.
What are we going to do?
That’s the question.
Are we going to make this into an exuberant,
joyful,
wonderful planet,
or we going to make this into a miserable,
horrible planet?
This is our time,
we are free to do either way.
The choice is yours.
I won’t tell you,
“Take a resolution that you will make this into a wonderful planet.”
There is no such thing.
The natural inclination of life is for pleasantness.
If you choose to be very pleasant within yourself,
pleasant things will happen.
If you’re feeling horrible within you,
and you try to do wonderful things,
then… I want you to understand (Laughs),
the worst tyrants on the planet,
those who topped the baddie list historically
I’ll pick up the worst of the lot.
You take somebody like Adolf Hitler or Benito Mussolini,
they really believed
they are going to create a wonderful world.
You know this?
They had a dream of an ideal world.
When you have horrible things going within you
and you go at the world with very energetically,
what you will create is a horrendous reality.
Before you touch the world,
if you want to clean somebody’s face,
your hands must be clean, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Your hands are not clean,
you try to touch this -
this’s not gonna work.
So before you touch the outside world,
this much you must do to with yourself that you are pleasant.
When you are pleasant,
whatever you touch will become pleasant.
You are unpleasant,
but you have good intentions,
it is no good.
I want you to understand,
right now in the world,
one situation that is happening in certain parts of the world,
which almost everybody in the world sees
as the most horrible things that can happen,
they believe they’re creating god’s own kingdom.
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: They one-hundred percent believe.
You may question their intelligence,
you cannot question their integrity
because they’re willing to die for it.
When a man is willing to die for something,
you cannot question his integrity, isn’t it?
You can question his intelligence and judgment,
but you cannot question his integrity
because when I stake my life,
you must know I mean it (Laughs), isn’t it?
I’m not playing fool with it,
it means more to me than my life.
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: I want you to know, you have anger and hatred going within you
but you want to create a wonderful world -
what happens,
the consequence of that is a horrendous reality.
It’s not by intention that the world will change,
it is by your consciousness that the world will change.
How you are within yourself.
If we don’t fix this one thing,
we will have intentions and intentions.
The worst things have happened on the planet with good intentions,
not with bad intentions.
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: The most horrendous things have happened with very good intentions.
So what intention you have is not important,
what is your inner nature,
this is important.
Every action that humanbeings are doing in their life
knowingly or unknowingly
is in pursuit of their well being.
And you know you feel well only when you are joyful
Hello
yes?
You feel really well only when you are joyful isn't it?
Or in other words,
every single action that human beings perform
is in pursuit of their happiness or joy.
If they were joyful by their own nature,
every action that you perform would become conscious
instead of being compulsive, isn’t it?
This is all you have to do to yourself.
This year,
the coming year,
and the coming, coming year and for the rest of your life,
you just have to keep accounts.
From yesterday to today,
am I little more joyful?
Am I...
You don’t even have to worry about giving joy,
if you’re joyful, you will spread joy.
Yes?
Will you keep accounts, I’m asking?
Meditators: Yes
Sadhguru: Or shall I set IRS upon you (Laughter)?
Do you need enforcement (Laughs)?
Most societies have been run for a long time by enforcement.
So if there’s nobody to enforce (Gestures) (Laughter).
No,
that’s not what happens.
If there is nobody to enforce anything,
you become joyful, isn’t it (Laughs)?
I want you to understand this (Laughter),
the different between a resolution
and moving towards the natural inclination of life.
If there is nobody enforcing anything upon you,
do you become miserable or joyful?
Participant: Joyful.
Sadhguru: So, you don’t have to enforce any resolutions upon yourself,
just little tools to make sure that you don’t sink.
Just keeping accounts,
daily.
Every day before you go to bed,
you must check
whether you’re little more joyful today than yesterday, okay?
If you keep this up,
by the time you’re thirty,
you will be ecstatic (Laughs).
When I was (Laughs)...
When I was just twenty-five...
tch,
I simply sat down with my eyes closed,
every cell in my body was dripping ecstasy,
nameless ecstasies.
Then I realized this is it.
Nothing to be done.
If you don’t mess with your mind,
you’re ecstatic.
The fool that I was, I made a plan –
in two-and-a-half to three years’ time,
I’m going to make the entire world ecstatic
because there’s nothing to do.
If you simply sit here (Gestures)… you know?
Thirty-five years (Points to his white beard) (Laughter).
I have not lost it.
A few people have gotten it.
Yes,
quite a few people have gotten it,
but still not the world (Laughs).
Making some estimates and...
on an average,
in the last three years’ time
we should be touching nearly hundred million people a year,
but still that’s not the world (Applause).
No, no, no don’t... don’t...
don’t enjoy my failures (Laughter).
My idea of the world is 7.3 billion people,
tch
hundred million is not a success.
It looks like I’m destined to die a failure
but I’ll die a blissful failure
because me being blissful is not dependent upon the results of my actions
(Laughs).
My actions are rooted in my blissfulness.
This is how life needs to be conducted,
that your actions are rooted in your joyfulness and blissfulness.
That joy is not a result of something that you do.
The moment it is a result of something that you do,
it will fly away in no time
because our actions in the world,
not always are they successful.
Hmm?
However well you do it.
Yes or no?
However well you do it,
not always are they successful.
Our actions are subject to various realities.
Many forces have to come together for the success of any action.
Not always they will fall together.
So if your joy,
if your way of being is enslaved to the success of your activity,
then you being joyful is a very remote possibility.
And above all,
what will happen is,
when you perform actions,
if they don’t succeed,
if you’re going to become miserable
after a couple of burns,
then you will shrink.
You will see how to restrict your life to minimal activity so that
you will enjoy maximum success.
If you cripple yourself, you know?
If you cripple yourself,
you can participate in a race with people...
Suppose you have only one leg,
then you participate in a race
with somebody who does not have both the legs
and of course you win.
This is what most people are trying to do.
The moment there is fear of suffering,
of failure,
what you will do is cripple yourself,
restrict your activity.
Only when failure doesn’t matter,
that you can go through your failure blissfully,
you will do everything that you can do.
Who cares whether it happens or not?
We will do it and we’ll do it well.
If it happens, it’s great.
If it doesn’t happen, it’s very great
because we can do it all over again (Laughs).
Joy is not a consequence of life or activity of life.
Joy is a natural ambiance which is necessary
if you have to...
Tomorrow morning if you have to wake up
and want to do something,
you no... you need to have some joy in you –
otherwise “to be or not to be” (Laughter).
Will it come or not?
Suppose you wake up and you...
tomorrow morning you’re bereft of joy,
nothing in you,
you’ll wonder, “Why am I here?”
Yes or no?
One day, one twenty-four hours completely joyless,
will you wonder,
“what the hell I’m doing here?”
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Because this is the nature of life.
If this life has to blossom,
it needs the ambiance of joy.
So, we have given you the tools (Laughs) to live joyfully.
You must keep accounts.
Hmm?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: (Gestures) Yes (Laughter).
I got it (Laughter).
Before they serve food and music is ready and the party is ready,
I don’t want to take any more time,
if there is a question that you can't go into the New Year
without being answered,
if there is such a question (Laughter), okay?
Not that you must ask a question,
if there is such a question, okay?
No,
it works only if you speak (Laughter).
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement).
Questioner: I have thousands of burning questions (Few laugh)
but I thank you immensely for giving me this opportunity to ask one question.
How do I get rid of some unconscious bad habits in my life?
When I see that I have overcome some of those bad habits,
I see that it comes back again in my life.
How do I just totally get rid of this and become free out of it
Sadhguru: See, you must understand that… Please
There is no such thing as good habit and bad habit.
All habits are bad (Laughter).
Because habit means you’re unconscious.
You think only bad habits are unconscious?
No.
Even the so-called good habits...
Habit means you have learned to function in an automated way.
That means you don’t do things consciously.
For example,
is brushing your teeth in the morning
a good habit or a bad habit (Laughter)?
Even you?
I thought you would be free from a habit (Laughter).
There are two ways of brushing your teeth.
Because you’ve been regimented to brush your teeth,
you get up and ffff (Gestures) (Laughter)
Or because you wake up,
you’re very sensitive,
if you open your mouth,
you’re conscious enough (Laughter)
Most of the time,
you’re not conscious enough,
only other people know (Laughter).
This is a very strange thing.
There is the apparatus,
the olfactory apparatus,
which smell… which have a sense of smell, right here (Gestures),
above your mouth (Few laugh).
But you don’t get it,
others get it five feet away (Laughter).
That means you’re unconscious, isn't it?
Yes?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you’re conscious you would still brush your teeth.
Till you come to such a place,
when you open your mouth in the morning
it smells like fragrance, you become like a flower,
till that happens,
you must consciously brush (Laughter).
If you consciously brush,
on different days
or different mornings
it may need different length
or different amount of brushing.
Not every day, brushing is same requirement.
But because you’re regimented,
“Three minutes, I must wear my teeth out” (Laughter)
If you were conscious,
on a particular day you would brush as it is necessary for that day.
That’s how it should be.
On a particular day,
you would eat as it is necessary for the body,
you would sleep as it is necessary for the body.
You would do everything consciously.
But now, it's a habit,
everything is a habit.
What time you should go to bed,
what time you should wake up,
what you should eat,
what you should not eat –
everything by prescription.
This is called slavery.
Your doctor tells you
or your slave master tells you what you should eat today.
I don’t see what's the difference.
Why is it that you do not know
what this body needs today?
Because no consciousness,
everything by regimentation,
by habit.
Habit is regimentation, isn't it?
It's only by regimentation you become habitual.
So in this, you have also identified something as good habit
and something as bad habit.
What to do?
Is there something called as bad unconsciousness
and good unconsciousness?
That’s what you’re saying.
When you say, “I have a good habit”,
you’re saying, “I’m unconscious in a nice way” (Laughter).
It's like … saying,
“I’m dead in a nice way” (Laughter).
Because the fundamental difference
between being alive and being dead is
being conscious and being totally unconscious.
Being partially unconscious is being partially dead.
As I earlier told you,
you’re trying to practice the posture (Laughs)
and the state of what it means to be dead.
Do not fix any kind of habit.
Just see
See, the idea of withdrawing into retreats,
coming to a spiritual space is just this –
to find space where you can do everything consciously.
When you were in a race,
you could not be conscious,
you got mad
and you somehow fixed some habits
through which you managed to go through your daily office routine.
When you come to a spiritual space,
this is what you’re supposed to do –
that you watch what is the requirement of your body,
what is the requirement of your mind,
what is the requirement of your emotion,
what is the requirement of your energy?
What does this life (Referring to oneself) need,
what does it naturally long for?
To consciously watch this!
Once you consciously know that this is what it is longing for,
then there is no two ways about it.
Otherwise, you think you’re on the spiritual path because of me,
that’s a crime against me (Laughter).
Yes (Laughs).
If you’re unconscious, it’s a crime against yourself.
But you’re doing something that you think is spiritual
because of me,
that’s a crime against me.
Tch,
you better do crime against yourself, not against me (Few laugh).
So, how do I get rid of habits?
You don’t have to get rid of habits.
It is like
What you’re asking is,
“How do I get rid of my unconsciousness?”
When you use the word “un”,
we are suggesting a non-existence,
not an existence, isn't it?
Consciousness is.
When consciousness is not there,
that is called un-consciousness.
How to get rid of something that does not exist?
I’m saying you’re playing a trick with yourself.
It's like,
suppose this… this hall is dark.
How to get rid of this darkness?
Kick it out.
Hmm?
All of you together, I’m sure you can kick out of the darkness.
You will get into an insane effort.
You’ve been on it,
hmm,
this insane effort to get rid of unconsciousness.
No.
To get rid of darkness, you just have to light it up.
If you light it up,
darkness is gone
because darkness is not an existence by itself.
It's just the absence of light.
Similarly, unconsciousness is not an existence of itself.
It is just absence of consciousness.
If you become conscious,
do you have to fight with unconscious?
Hmm?
If you’re conscious,
do you have to fight with unconscious habits?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: No. So you need to work on consciousness, to become conscious.
“Oh, what should I do?”
You should not do unconscious things (Laughter).
Because the essence of life is being conscious.
You know that you’re alive only because you’re reasonably conscious, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You’re fast asleep.
Do you know you’re dead or alive?
Do you know?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: No.
Why? Because you’re not conscious.
When you’re not conscious,
you do not even know whether you’re dead or alive, isn't it?
Now you know that you’re alive
because you’re somewhat conscious.
Now, we just have to raise the wick a little bit to become more conscious.
That’s what we’re working on.
There are many things, which has gathered inertia.
Your physical body
that’s why the 5:30 drum in the morning.
Your mind has got into its own habitual patterns
that’s why me torturing you with all this.
Your energies have followed the requirement of body and mind
and they’ve gotten into their own patterns –
that is why the sadhana.
The idea is to break the cycles of unconsciousness and become conscious.
When you become conscious,
it looks like you’re in unknown terrain,
suddenly everything seems to be difficult.
When you were going habitually, it looked like everything was easy but
See, when I (Laughs)
when I went into the Coimbatore prison
No,
I went there unqualified, you know (Laughter).
When I went there to conduct a program (Laughter),
almost twenty-five… twenty-four, twenty-five years ago,
I just observed –
this is something a whole lot of people are seeking in their life,
prison life,
because this is a place where somebody always opens the doors for you
and they close it for you,
they turn off the lights for you,
they do everything for you,
you don’t have to do anything (Few laugh), really.
Food comes bang on time (Laughter), always,
by the second, I’m telling you.
Tun means food is ready.
Everything is great in this prison.
I thought this is a great place.
Only thing is it's enforced.
But this is what a whole lot of people are seeking
systems in their life.
Yes?
When it is done to you, you will suffer it, I’m telling you (Laughs).
When it is done to you, you’ll suffer it.
Actually, for a whole lot of people,
prison life is far more
it is far more organized (Sounds like – than?) what they dream of in their life.
It's far more efficient,
far more nutritious (Few laugh)
and most of them are very fit and healthy.
But if you enter the prison,
there is suffering in the air.
Not once – I have been there hundreds of times to various prisons –
not once have I stepped out of the prison without tears in my eyes because
there is suffering in the air.
The pain in the air is unbearable.
Because one thing that a human being suffers most is lack of freedom –
not lack of comfort,
not lack of wealth,
not lack of this and that.
Once freedom is taken away,
a human being suffers immensely.
Everything is correct.
Prison life is far more comfortable than going to work and coming back,
getting stuck in the traffic,
going through all these problems.
You are a state guest, you know (Laughter).
Really!
If you’re looking for a comfortable,
no surprises kind of life (Laughter)
If you suffer every little thing, sh
everything shocks you,
everything makes you go through stress and tension,
prison life is perfect (Few laugh).
Everything is in order,
no surprises,
everything is just right.
Even the menu is written down –
next seven days, what's the menu,
it's there and it goes by that,
nothing more, nothing more… nothing less.
One bean more means somebody will be taken to task (Laughs).
Everything is correct.
Those who are looking for a correct life,
prison is the best place (Few laugh).
But a human being will suffer immensely when everything is correct.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Everything is correct but no freedom –
people will suffer this immensely.
So, you need to understand,
habit means you have caused a little prison of your own
and you will suffer this after some time.
Initially, it looks like efficiency.
After some time,
it is imprisonment.
Prison is in many ways an epitome of efficiency, isn't it?
But efficiency is not what this life (Referring to oneself) is looking for.
This life (Referring to oneself) is looking for expansion.
This life (Referring to oneself) wants the freedom to expand, always.
I was talking to one of this management specialists from America,
a very well-known man –
let me not mention the names.
So, he was propounding all his management principles,
which if
which looked like a prison cell to me –
bringing order to everything,
so that it's efficient.
See, there are two ways of looking at this.
There is a manicured garden, which looks very perfect.
There is forest, which looks like chaos.
But the manicured garden,
if you don’t manage it for one month, it’s finished.
There’s no garden left.
A forest has managed itself for a million years
and still going on.
Which is more efficient?
Which is more orderly?
Participants: Forest.
Sadhguru: Forest is far more orderly and far more efficient.
But it is not fitting into your logical framework, that’s all.
This is what enlightenment means,
that from being a manicured garden,
you become a forest because
it sustains upon itself.
It doesn’t need anything from outside.
Nobody need to water it,
nobody need to manure it,
nobody need to come and trim it.
Everything happens within itself.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you leave it for a million years it’ll still be there.
Only if you meddle with it, it may go away.
Otherwise, it will sustain itself because it is an efficiency of chaos.
We call something chaos not because it is inefficient,
we call something chaos because it doesn’t fit in to our logical framework.
So habit means you have become a slave of your own logic
and after some time
The moment you form a habit,
it is unconscious, isn't it?
So, what you need to get rid of is not habits.
You have to become conscious.
If you become more conscious and you’re not unconscious,
then there is no such thing as habit.
You will do what's right for you now.
So, nine-hundred-and-ninety-nine questions,
please live with it for 2017 (Laughter).
All the best.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Thank you so much for this opportunity.
I have a question regarding the book
and I wanted to know like if we read the book
as I’ve read it and I’m doing the practices,
the practices in the book,
how do they help versus the programs that we have
and if someone’s reading the book and doing the practices,
is that enough
or what is that they need to do next?
(Kids approach Sadhguru with flowers and presents)
Sadhguru: Hey! What did I do to deserve this?
Hmm? Hmm?
What’s your name?
Little Boy: Shashi.
Sadhguru: Thank you (Applause). (More kids approach)
Oh! Oh! Oh ho ho ho ho (Applause).
Isn’t it a bit too early for flowers (Laughs)?
Thank you.
Little Girl: These are slippers for the airplane.
Sadhguru: Oh! I must wear them on the airplane?
I usually don’t walk,
I fly (Laughter).
Thank you (Laughs).
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much (Applause).
Little Girl 2: Can I please say a poem?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Little Girl 2: Can I please say a poem?
Sadhguru: I’m sorry?
Little Girl 2: Can I please say a poem?
Sadhguru: Oh yes please.
Microphone please (Laughter).
There’s a poem
they’re going to recite.
Little Girl 2: My heart is like a singing bird whose nest is in a watered shoe.
My heart is like an apple tree,
whose boughs are bound by thick sap fruit.
My heart is like a rainbow show that paddles in the sea.
My heart is gladder than all these because my love has come to me.
Raise me days of silk and down,
covered in peacocks and doves and pea... pomegranates and peacocks with one hundred eyes,
work it in gold and silver grapes and leaves and silver firty...
because the birthday of my life has come,
my love has come to me (Applause).
Sadhguru: (Laughs) What a sweet poem (hugging both children)!
Sadhguru: I’m sorry (Laughter).
You know, we’re washed away by...
We lost the question, you know (Laughter)?
Okay, okay, practices, practices (Laughter).
Questioner: If only... If I get to do that,
that would be amazing (Laughter).
Sadhguru: I’m sorry?
Questioner: That was lovely, the kids getting to hug you,
it was amazing (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Hmm? What is that?
Questioner: The kids getting to hug you was amazing, you know?
So it’s okay.
Sadhguru: But you don’t have a sweet poem like her (Laughter/Applause).
Oh, when you said the book, you know I’m supposed to finish this book before 3rd of January,
so I’m working on that book.
When you said, “The book” -
I was just thinking book, book, book
because this book is bothering me for last few days,
I’m supposed to complete it by 3rd January (Laughs).
We’re writing a book on Adiyogi.
I’m to give it to the publisher by 3rd January and...
So that’s the book on my mind.
You’re talking about the old book (Laughter).
Old book.
Okay (Laughs).
The practice that is taught in the Inner Engineering program needs twenty-one minutes,
you need to sit in one place and do it.
It is of a different nature.
It is...
It is a process which can change...
to start with,
the chemistry of your system.
Many of you have experienced this,
after a few months of practice,
if you look back and see,
all those little-little things which were so significant
don’t seem to bother you anymore,
they’re just gone.
Simply because the chemistry has changed.
You know when chemistry changes, things change (Laughter).
In whatever way you have known it,
but there are other dimensions to human chemistry
that instead of being a volatile reactive chemistry,
can become a very self-contained chemistry
which is pleasant and on.
The practices in the book are not
sitting down and doing practices,
you could be doing it anywhere.
You could be driving,
you could be working in your office,
you could be walking on the street
and still be doing it.
They’re of that nature.
Or in other words, the practices in the book are
just to bring a certain amount of consciousness.
The book did not have these practices to start with,
but when I travelled around in America,
everybody was talking about being mindful. (Laughs)
Then I saw,
by being mindful what they will do to themselves.
My entire work is to bring you to a certain sense of abandon
that you can be here like you’re not here.
If you sit here,
you don’t even know whether your body is here.
If you sit like this,
first thing is you don’t have a gender.
You don’t even have a body,
so where is the question of a gender.
If you simply sit like this,
there is no time for you.
Just look at this.
Only because you have a body,
your body is keeping time.
Hmm?
Your legs are telling you how long you’ve been sitting.
Yes or no (Laughter)?
Hmm?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Suppose you had no legs,
you would have no sense of time.
If you had no back,
no sense of time at all.
If you had no body, no time at all, isn’t it?
Your body is keeping time from womb to tomb it is keeping time,
from bathroom break to bathroom break it is keeping time,
from wakeup to sleep it is keeping time.
Yes or no?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Once it’s time, it’ll do Aaaaa (Laughter).
You don’t have to look at the watch,
once a certain time is up,
your body will do Aaaaa.
Yes or no?
Right now… You’ve seen that old time machines with sand trickling away,
like that the bladder is keeping time (Laughter).
Drop, drop, drop (Laughter)
as it fills up,
you know what’s the time.
Legs are keeping the time.
If you’d done your practices regularly,
I mean the... tch the program practices,
not the book practices.
If you’d done the program practices regularly,
your legs can deceive time.
You...
Your legs don’t know what’s the time,
your legs know (Laughs),
book... book practice (Laughter).
So, the program practices are of a different nature
that cannot be transmitted
unless a certain amount of preparation and...
It’s a transmission,
it’s not a teaching.
Book is a teaching.
There is a big difference between teaching and transmission.
Do not misunderstand both as one.
This is a way of creating a smaller step for people.
Because people are not willing to take one big step,
one small step,
they read the book and if some small things change,
they may take the program.
But there is no substitute for sitting properly with eyes closed
and doing what is being done properly
and not only that,
there is no substitute for a transmission.
If something is not transmitted,
nothing new till happen.
Improvement of the present will happen,
nothing new will happen.
With Shambhavi we are not looking at improving you,
we want something new to sprout in you.
Something that was never there with you till that moment must happen within you,
that’s the intent.
The book is trying to decorate the
existing.
Whatever you are right now, to make a little improvement.
Most people are looking for improvements in life,
they are not looking for transformation.
Transformation means nothing of the old should remain,
that’s transformation.
But most people cling to the old.
Will you leave 2016
or will you carry it with you?
Hmm?
Can you?
Though it leaves you, you will not leave it (Laughter).
2016 will leave you, but you will not leave 2016, isn’t it?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Because you are a creature of memories.
If you are a creature of memories,
you are a creature of the past.
Hmm?
That means you are a dinosaur which is extinct (Laughter).
You’ve become big because of your memories, isn’t it?
But you’re extinct.
Tch,
what is the use?
Dinosaur was a big creature, but doesn’t exist,
what is the use I’m asking?
Like this if you live in your memory,
you are big, but what is the use?
What is needed is to reverberate with what is there now.
Memory is good to handle the world.
It’s good only to handle the world,
it’s no good to handle this one (Referring to oneself), isn’t it?
Do you understand what I’m saying?
Memory is good to handle the world around us.
We need to remember what happened -
what happened with this person,
what happened with that person,
what happened with that situation and this situation,
we need to remember.
It is useful to address the world.
But with your silly memory,
you cannot address this one.
It doesn’t mean anything.
This one you can address only with consciousness.
There is no other way.
Otherwise you won’t have this one.
You have assembly of things.
See, let me address something very sensitive,
I want you to listen to this carefully otherwise you’ll come to wrong conclusions.
Let’s say somebody very dear to you dies,
or they go away for some reason,
you feel like you lost everything.
Yes or no?
You feel like you lost everything
because you are making up a life of substitution.
Where you are not there,
you filled it up with other people.
When they go away, there is vacuum.
But that’s not how life is happening.
Because you are there,
only because you are there,
you can hold relationships with people, isn’t it?
Hello?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: But now in your experience you are not there,
because you are a creature of memory.
You can only remember this one and that one and that one.
You can’t remember this one.
How can you remember this one?
Because this is a current life.
You cannot remember this one.
Because you’re handling everything by memory,
you will see
when one volume of memory which was a certain person or a situation,
if that goes away,
it feels like life has come to an end.
Simply because
a certain amount of investment you’ve made in a certain amount of memory you have about a specific person.
So if you live by memory,
I’m saying 2016 will leave you but you will not leave 2016.
If you don’t leave 2016,
how do you go to 2017?
You cannot.
You drag all these years and go into 2017,
there’s no such thing.
You will be on a treadmill.
You’ll get the exercise but you won’t go anywhere.
Treadmill is fine if the weather is bad (Laughs).
But it’s not a vehicle to go somewhere.
This much you must understand.
Memory is a treadmill.
Yes?
Memory is a treadmill.
It is all right to handle situations around us
but you’re not going to go anywhere with it.
But human beings have invested so much in their memory,
there’s hardly a handful who will go with me on this one.
Tch.
I’m asking,
how many of you really want to step into 2017?
Fully, leaving 2016 behind.
Meditators: Yeah! Yes!
Sadhguru: Whoa, whoa, whoa (Laughs)!
If you really... If really, really I’m saying,
if you can leave the past as past, completely,
if you can sit here just in the present,
no past,
you’re enlightened, you know?
That’s all it takes.
It’s the burden of the past
which doesn’t let you flower into a full possibility.
Just the burden of the past.
So this is a good moment.
This is not something that the planet is doing, okay?
Tch,
yes the solstice has just happened,
that is there,
but every day planet is spinning,
every day it is moving,
in the trajectory of the planetary movement around the sun
you can choose any point to get enlightened,
you don’t have to wait for this point (Laughs).
Yes or no?
But anyway we are at this point
where somewhere in your mind you’ve been told it is significant.
It’s only significant because there is a memory of 2016.
If there is no memory of 2016,
in what way there is a 2017?
There is no such thing.
No, no, this is
“Sadhguru, you’re confusing us (Laughter).
Sixteen...
Sixteen...
Seventeen (Laughter).
It’s correct, arithmetically correct.”
Yes,
but only because there is memory,
there is sixteen and there is seventeen, isn’t it?
Meditator: Yes.
Sadhguru: So if you know how to simply sit here
without being burdened by your memory,
without being a product of memory...
When I say product of memory -
your likes,
your dislikes
whom you love,
whom you don’t love,
who is your friend,
who is your enemy,
all this comes because of your memory, isn’t it?
If you can keep all that aside
and let the New Year blossom,
you will blossom into a wonderful creature,
spraying fragrance into the world.
Well,
there won’t be any attendant music
nor will there be an applause,
but if really beautiful things happen who cares
whether it is appreciated by somebody (Laughs) or not (Applause)?
Hey,
where is the attendant music?
What happened to the musicians (Laughter)?
Come on!
Nothing so wonderful happened,
so let’s have some music (Laughter).
What?
Sadhguru: What is this?
What did you say?
Meditator: Isha Home School
Sadhguru: (Laughs) I have no such mission.
It’s for the parents to decide where they want to send their children.
Hmm?
Sadhguru: So what do you want to do with them, eh (Laughs)?
Sadhguru: Oh, you’re thinking of starting a school here?
Meditator: Yes, yes,
so many children
Sadhguru: Look at that one (Laughter).
Sadhguru: She is a missionary, I’m not (Laughter).
Anyway,
just to tell you a few things.
One thing is,
on February twenty-fourth is a once in a lifetime kind of event for Isha
that we’re unveiling this hundred-and-twelve feet tall face of Adiyogi
in Coimbatore
in the Isha Yoga Center in India.
It’s going to be a massive campaign,
particularly in India
but even internationally there will be a certain level of campaign.
The fundamental idea is to use this iconic face as a galvanizing force –
as I said the book is getting ready –
to use it as a galvanizing force
to move people –
it’s a dangerous thing to say in Tennessee –
to move people from religion to responsibility.
Why I’m saying this is –
humanity has become like this,
if small things go wrong in their life,
they will find one little guy to blame (Gestures) –
“because of him.”
If big things go wrong in their life,
they’ll find that big guy (Gestures – pointing upwards) –
“because of him.”
What about this guy (Referring to oneself)?
some of the studies show that on an average all Indian rivers are depleting by eight percent per year.
that means in about fifteen to twenty years,
almost all the rivers which have been perennial will become seasonal
for variety of reasons.
So for the last three years I’ve been working on this
and we’ve come up with a kind of a... a policy that the government has to take up.
We’ve worked with a couple of state governments
which they’re already trying to implement.
I’ve managed to convince two Chief Ministers and make this happen.
I’ve recently put this across to the Prime Minister
and he’s agreed to this in principle.
But to raise this awareness across the country
because most people are unaware of it completely,
so...
And also
it’s been a long time since I drove across the country.
So, we’re driving from Leh-Ladakh which is the ta... Northernmost tip of India
to Kanyakumari
and back on the East Coast
and back to Delhi.
Totally about 12,000 kilometers.
About sixteen major events will happen on the way.
So those of you who can drive in India (Laughter/Applause)
Because it takes a different level of skill.
If you wish to be a part of that,
we will do this rally of a certain number of people.
Some can ride on a electric bus,
rest can drive.
There’ll be probably two or four electric busses
and maybe twenty-five to fifty cars.
In each segment,
lot more will join
but this complete trip will be approximately twenty-five cars and two busses probably.
It’ll be finalized later
but there will be major events in all the cities
to raise the awareness about the rivers in India.
So we want to involve the entire population in the cities,
there’ll be rivers you know
river related quizzes for the children,
people will run for the rivers,
people will cycle for the rivers,
people will do all kinds of things
for rivers on that day
when the event comes to that city.
And above all to make a policy document
and when we come back to Delhi,
we’re having a conference where we present this
along with the Chief Ministers of many states
we’re going to sign a river accord
as to what the policy should be about rivers.
Even now,
different states are fighting with each other for river waters,
not realizing that in another fifteen-twenty years,
there may be nothing to fight about (Laughter).
Yes,
it’s a serious situation.
So this is going to happen.
If some of you wish to participate in this,
it’s going to be an incredible experience of
driving across the length and breadth of India,
which is by any standards
the most colorful nation on the planet –
chaotic, but colorful (Applause).
Sadhguru: It should take about twenty-five days.
Anywhere between twenty to twenty-five days, I think.
Sadhguru: Hmm? I’m sorry?
Questioner: _____ (Unclear) about the school (Laughter).
Especially in _____ (Unclear).
Sadhguru: She’s gonna do it anyway, so (Laughter)
I’m not against it but I’m not for it either. (Laughs)
I’m definitely not against it
but I know what it takes to run a good school.
It’s not about buildings,
getting the right people with
long-term commitment
to well-being of children
who may not be theirs but
when you have children who are not yours,
you have to do much more than what you would do with yours.
I need people like that who are willing to do a lot more with somebody else’s children
than they would do with their own.
If there are such people,
a school will come together anyway (Applause).
If you live by this silly standard of what is yours and what is not yours,
anyway you will live in a very small space on this planet
and in this cosmos.
If you have no sense of what is yours and what is not yours,
everything will be open to you.
That’s my blessing to you –
let the entire cosmos be yours.
Why are you stingy?
Why are you even stingy in your greediness?
At least in your greed be boundless.
Hmm?
I’m not saying generosity,
I’m saying greed.
At least in your greed,
let there be no limit,
that you want everything to be yours -
that’s greed,
ultimate.
That’s my blessing -
may you become greedy in a limitless way (Laughter).
Why are you stingy even on your greed, eh?
Stupid (Laughs).
Please.
You take away negative thoughts.
Don't identify any thought as negative because it's just a thought.
Who told you it's negative? It's just the thought. You're making it up. Maybe you like it. What's your problem.
If you understand its just a thought, it has no power
If you understand. It's just a thought it is no power
If you think it's a reality then it destroys you
Its just a thought isn't it ? Is it true  that you made up the thought
No, ah
If you're having doubts about it because you are not thinking you have a mental diarrhoea happening.
Yes, it's simply happening
the word thinking means
You are exercising your thought process consciously, isn't it?
Yes. Thinking means you are doing something consciously
Right now this is in a state of mental diarrhea . It's just pouring all the time
Now what is negative about it? What is positive about? What is negative is it's happening unconsciously
That is what is negative not the content
You thought about the devil. That's negative you thought about a God that is positive. There is no such thing
The most negative thing that's happening right now is it's happening unconsciously.
That is what is negative about it.
And
more a whole lot of people have destroyed themselves,
trying to stop those thoughts that they think are negative.
And
they try to fight them in so many different ways.
You create these things and then you fight them
It's your thought
You must be able to throw it and roll
It back whenever you want isn't it you must be able to roll it out and all it in as you want, but right now
your own ghosts have become so big
That you want to fight them if you will you've really lost
Because something that is not true if you fight and win it you have really lost it isn't it?
So there is no such thing as negative and positive thought. Either it's a conscious thought or it's a diarrhea
So how to stop this? see suppose you are having diarrhea, physical diarrhea.
First thing to do is, every other treatment is next first thing to do is stop eating bad food isn't it?
Something cause diarrhea first thing we stop eating bad food whatever caused this stop that
This is the first thing you must do. Right now the bad food is just this.
You identified yourself with something that you are not.
Now you can't stop your thought process. Do what you want you do any Mantra
You want to think of any God you want. Do whatever the hell you want.
The moment you identify yourself with something that you're not.
You cannot stop your mind.
Sadhguru: Someone who is autistic means at a certain level
sometimes it can be very bad, that’s different
at a certain level, one thing that’s happened is
not much input gets into him from outside world.
Sometimes it’s a blessing.
Somebody normal means,
there is too much external input.
So, because of the kind of societies that we have created
which are absurd and twisted out if you ask me,
because of that as you were mentioning a certain time of life,
as if it’s problem
teenage means problem,
middle age means problem,
old age means problem.
So, only death is no problem.
isn’t this so?
People think teenage is problem, middle age is problem, old age is problem.
What is not the problem?
Only death. (Laughs)
So, the only time they are peaceful and still is when they are dead.
Unfortunate - this is not what a human being is made for.
But we have structured everything like that,
that a man can never find rest in his life.
Rest does not mean physical rest.
There is no one moment of ease, simply.
These structured societies
where you have house mortgage which is for thirty years,
a car mortgage which is for ten years,
an education loan which is twenty two years
you got a life term.
You’re doing your time in a open prison.
So, in such a situation,
any sensitive human being will become withdrawn and miserable
unless they are heavily equipped
or completely insensitive.
Yes, we’re creating such societies.
This is our idea of civilization unfortunately.
So,
about the boy,
without seeing him, we cannot say what can be done.
We do not know what’s the level of perception.
But if he is happy, what’s the problem?
Somebody thinks he is not normal, so what?
That way no… none of you are normal in my perception.
So, it’s okay.
If he is happy, it doesn’t matter.
Maybe he can’t do a few things that others do.
There’re whole lot of people who cannot do what somebody else does here, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
Isn’t that true with every one of us?
So what? He can’t do certain things.
Never compare one human being with another.
If you compare one with the other, everybody is abnormal.
Yes or no?
Tell… Show me one normal human being here.
If you hold any one person as normal standard,
there is nobody else like him.
That means everybody else is abnormal.
So, do not compare and put these titles on children
this one is autistic,
this one is ADH,
that one is XYZ - it’s not needed.
Different people have different levels of competence and capability.
It’s okay.
If it’s causing pain and uncontrolled misery, then we must be concerned about it.
If it is not, it’s fine.
So, don’t put any titles on the boy.
He is just another piece of life like anybody else.
It’s fine?
His capabilities may not be the same as somebody else.
That means he cannot be a cog in the larger machine.
I am very happy for that.
I would like to see every child grows up like that,
not to grow up as a cog in a large monstrous machine we have created,
but, every individual blossoms as an individual human being.
Maybe our economy then will not be touching some mad peaks which are anyway
When I look at the economy touching mad peaks,
I know we are heading for destruction straight.
Yes, we are.
We have created an economic engine into which
you have to feed your children as fuel.
Yes, I want you to get this straight.
We have built a huge monstrous machine where your children are the fuel.
You are anyway burning,
you are preparing your children for the next load of fuel to be burnt.
From the age of six,
“What will you become,
what will you become,
what will you become?”
“What will I become?
What am I supposed to become?
“No, no. Will you become doctor or engineer?
Tell me what will you become, what will you become?
How much money will you make?”
What is this rubbish?
Have we lost it?
We’ve definitely lost it in terms of life.
So, at least one boy will not be a cog in the machine
and I am happy
and it’s time every parent thinks straight
whether you want to feed them as fuel into that monstrous machine
which is eating up the whole planet.
Yes?
It’s not making anybody happy.
It’s just burning the whole planet.
And if you don’t feed your children into this machine,
at least it will slow down a bit.
You can’t stop the monster,
but you can slow it down.
Your girl, you send her here.
We will make here nice and send her back.
Sadhguru: Essentially the difference between Ayurveda and siddha and allopathy is just this
allopathy is purely chemical,
chemical manipulation of the system.
When it's an emergency, you must use it.
But if it's a long
you know if it's a chronic ailment which is going to be with you for a long time
and you’re going to take some medicine for a long time,
definitely popping pills for long periods of time is not a good thing.
So Ayurveda is herbal;
herbs are also chemicals but in natural form.
It’s way better than taking it in a synthetic form.
Ayurveda needs a certain amount of application and knowledge
because (Laughs) there are over three hundred thousand… okay?
Three hundred thousand Ayurvedic formulations
according to the ancient texts.
Three hundred thousand formulations you have to understand
if you have to really prescribe Ayurveda.
So prescribing or practicing Ayurveda is a
it needs a lifelong involvement.
These days I see people come from outside the country;
they study Ayurveda for one-and-a-half months
and they are certified ayurvedic teachers or doctors, practitioners,
which is a very dangerous thing to do.
Three hundred thousand formulations,
how to give it,
to whom to give it,
when to give it is not a simple thing to understand,
it takes a lot.
Above all you need a phenomenal understanding of the body to be able to prescribe this.
Siddha is very different in the sense,
siddha is essentially elemental in nature.
This… there are herbs but essentially it's elemental in nature.
It comes more from the yogic science
because the fundamental of yogic science is in Bhuta Shuddhi
or in cleansing of one’s elements.
This is an evolution from the yogic science
and siddha vaidya was essentially formulated by Agastya Muni
and they say Adiyogi himself practiced it
and Agastya brought it to the south and only in the south, it lived;
nowhere else.
(Questioner): Pranam Sadhguru.
I wanted to know what's so special about the maha bilva
(maha vilva?) leaf that we offer to Dhyanalinga?
Sadhguru: We have also been thinking of doing this
but in certain parts of the country
some people have tried to preserve all those leaves and flowers
which are considered sacred.
‘Why are they considered sacred?
Why is one flower more sacred than the other,
what is this nonsense all about?
Is it some kind of a prejudice?’
See, right now there are two trees here
this is punga maram and this (Referring to the vaahai maram
next to the temple)
is… what?
This is one of the common street-side trees,
I don't know the
what name they have for it - you must spend time
For all these things,
you need to spend time.
If you spend time with this tree and this tree,
you will see if you become meditative,
you will naturally move towards this
(Referring to punga maram), not towards that.
(Referring to the vaahai maram next to the temple)
Why is this so?
After all everything comes from the soil.
The neem tree
the neem fruit and the mango fruit come from the same soil
but they taste very different, isn't it?
Same soil,
right here they’re going side by side
but they taste very different.
So how this particular life processes the same soil
and how that life processes the same soil is different
or if you want to look at it that way,
between a worm and an insect and yourself and
one more other human being, what is the difference?
All the same stuff
but still what we make out of it is different, isn't it?
So in every society –
it doesn’t matter in how many try
in how many ways
you try to level societies and people,
people will stick out.
People with certain kinds of talents will stick out,
people with certain kinds of capability will stick out;
you can't put them down, isn't it?
Do what you want,
some people will stand out,
some people become part of the scenery.
This is bound to happen.
Similarly among other lives also it is true.
So with the plant life.
So people who are spiritually oriented,
who are constantly looking for support
in every possible way
because when you are
when you are on a
a long journey
and particularly if the terrain is unknown to you,
the terrain is absolutely new to you,
you would like to use every little support on the way.
You will see,
if you are going up a mountain
if you’re climbing Mt. Everest
suppose you are carrying one little thread,
you don’t want to lose that thread.
You want to keep it because
you do not know when this little thread will become useful.
If you are in a city, you can throw it and go but you are
on that kind of terrain which is unknown to you,
you don’t want to throw away
a single piece of thread because
you don't know how it will be useful tomorrow.
So when you are on the spiritual path, the same goes –
because it's an unknown terrain.
Every little thing that could support you,
people identified.
So they did not leave even the flowers and fruits and leaf –
all the things that can support you.
So always it is said vilva is dear to Shiva.
What does he care?
Okay?
It’s not that it is dear to Shiva.
When we say,it's dear to Shiva
in some way its reverberance is closest to that we refer to as Shiva.
It is closer, it is in the direction.
Like this we’ve identified many things –
not just one particular leaf.
We have identified many things,
and only those things are offered
because they become your means to get in touch.
You are not going to leave the leaf with him.
(Referring to Dhyanalinga)
You put it there and then you take it with you, isn't it?
Because this particular leaf has
the highest capability to absorb that reverberance
and it's for you to pick it up and go.
There’re many, many materials like this,
which are all recognized sacred tools that people are using.
You need to understand this–
this is not about gods,
this is about you and your ability to access something.
So suppose
You can try this:
You experiment like this –
go into Dhyanalinga,
okay?
Let's say with… like this (Referring to his clothes) organic cotton and sit there,
see how it feels.
Go, sit with raw silk and see how it feels.
Go, sit there with some nylon cloth,
see how it feels.
Wear a plastic wrap around you, go,
sit there, see how it feels.
Don’t believe anything, just experiment three,
three days you wear one kind of clothing and sit there,
you will… if you’re little
have little sensitivity, you will know the difference.
Then you’ll naturally choose the right thing.
So the important thing is when you go sit there,
everything that you have should help
you to absorb and nourish yourself –
that’s the idea.
So the vilva leaf has such a capability –
if you place it on the linga and then take it,
its ability to retain that reverberation for a long period of time. It stays with you.
If you keep it for a few days with you,
it makes a difference.
You can try this.
You… Vilva leaf can be offered and you
put it in your chest pocket and walk around,
it will make a difference for you
in terms of your health, well-being, mental state,
everything.
So people identified these things with observation,
with meditativeness,
not …in all… in this forest, there’re so many trees,
so many varieties of trees.
This is part of the Western Ghats,
this is the second oldest mountain on the planet
and it is ‘The oldest’ mountain on the planet in the tropical region on this planet.
So in terms of variety of vegetation,
there is no match for this Western Ghat.
This is only a small finger which has come inland
otherwise it runs along the coast.
In all this variety of trees and leaves,
why they chose one leaf?
Somebody recognized it and he stands out.
You can't ignore him.
You can also try this –
you can go and pluck ten different varieties of leaf,
place all of them near the linga
and take all of them and keep it with you.
You will see the difference by yourself.
It’ll take a certain level of sensitivity
for you to see that but there’s no question –
those who are sensitive will feel the difference.
With their eyes closed… if their eyes are open,
they may be prejudiced.
You take a bunch of ten different kinds of leaves,
tie it up in a cloth like this so that you can't see what leaf it is, place it there,
I will recognize the leaf for you.
Other things I may not be able to recognize –
you keep vilva there, I’ll say ‘This is vilva.’
You don’t have to call me for that;
you take your rudraksh and hold it, it will tell you.
It's little more
intelligent than you, you know.
Participant: Religion is supposed to be the means of peace,
attaining peace
but in practicality in reality today every religion has got a base of fundamentalism
and involve in terrorism.
Can we not make an attempt to create a new world order
where there is no religion at all?
Sadhguru: Now,
what you unfortunately know as religion in the world today
is just somebody’s belief systems.
Somebody believes God is round.
Somebody believes God is square.
Somebody else believes he is a triangle,
that’s the situation, isn't it?
And you must understand this,
once you start believing in something which is not yet a reality for you,
you are bound to be in conflict with somebody else
because somebody else is bound to believe something else.
“No, no, no, I believe in my God but I am not a violent person,
I will not fight with anybody” -
all this is just make up.
If they provoke you sufficiently you will fight.
Like for example,
let's say you believe God has four hands.
I believe God has no hands.
These are two belief systems.
Tomorrow out of your love for God
you put a 100 feet tall statue in Coimbatore City,
of course with four hands
but suddenly I feel so hurt.
These four hands look so ugly
because God actually has no hands
because that’s my belief.
So, tonight I will go to that statue,
I don’t intend to cause any damage to your god,
just to make him the way he really is without hands,
so I just cut off the four hands.
Tomorrow what’ll happen to you?
You want to cut off my hands, isn't it?
Simply because you believe one thing,
I believe something else.
As long as people believe in something
conflict is inevitable
because we may say “No, no, we are all brothers,
we are all one,
we are…everything is okay with us”
all this bhai bhai (brother) stuff.
When we really have to come to a point
“When I believe what I believe is right,
I will try to manifest it.
I will try to make it a common thing everywhere,” isn't it?
Yes?
Once I believe what I believe is the truth,
naturally I will try to impose it on other people.
I don’t call it imposition;
I call it saving you from ignorance.
Yes or no?
Once I firmly believe that this is the way God is
I will try to put it on to you,
just to save you, not to hurt you,
but you will get hurt because any imposition hurts.
When you resist I will use other methods to put it into you,
whatever those methods are -
sword has been used,
money has been used,
every kind of inducement has been used, isn't it?
Simply because I believe one thing, you believe another.
Religion is not about belief system.
All religions started as a method to turn inward
but…it's an inward step.
An inward step can be taken only by an individual. Isn't it so?
It’s a very intimate thing;
something very, very concerned with only with you
and nothing else to do with anybody else.
But when people try to organize this inward step,
naturally it gets distorted.
Now, we want to do our religion on the street.
Religion cannot be done on the street,
it can only be done within you.
If you become truly religious
you must be beyond any kind of conflict, isn't it,
both within and outside?
That is the whole crux of the religion, isn't it?
But today religion means conflict.
If you utter the word religion you are talking generally in terms of conflict
that is happening in the world, isn't it?
This is because you have reduced an inward step into a set of beliefs.
Because if you have to take an inward step
you have to transform yourself.
If you have to believe something
you don’t have to transform yourself,
you can do whatever nonsense you want
and still believe God is up in the heaven, isn't it?
Yes?
The crudest people,
the cruelest people on the planet have always been talking about God. Isn't it so?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: All the warmongers in the world have been talking about God. Isn't it so?
And God has been helping them.
See, the moment you believe something
you have a new kind of confidence,
that’s the biggest problem.
When idiots become very confident
the world is in danger.
An intelligent person is constantly hesitating with life.
With every step he wonders
whether what he is doing is okay or not
but a fool has absolute confidence
and when his stupidity gets stamped by God, that’s it,
no looking back,
just can go on doing the most idiotic things
without any problem about it.
The very nature of your intelligence is such
that if you do something stupid today,
tonight your intelligence will bother you,
“Why did I do this?”
Isn’t it so?
But if you get God’s stamp on your stupidity
you don’t have to turn back and see.
You can do grossest things on the planet
and not bother about it,
feel very proud that you are anyway going to go to heaven
because you did all this nonsense.
There is no experiential dimension,
you are just believing something.
Once you believe something,
your belief and somebody else’s belief are bound to clash somewhere.
The conflict in the world is not between good and evil, please see this.
Though people always claim it is so, it is not true.
It is always one man’s belief versus another man’s belief.
So, religion has become a problem
because we have reduced it into just a set of beliefs.
If it was experientially true
that you really felt God
then could there be conflict?
There is no such possibility, isn't it?
But because you are growing from belief system
you are not willing to make the effort of going beyond
what you have gathered from others and looking at life by yourself;
that is why there is conflict.
If you do not know there will be no conflict.
If you know there will be no conflict at all
but when you pretend to know there is bound to be conflict.
Sadhguru chants Sanskrit chant Jananam Sukhadam
Sadhguru: Namaskaram.
Namaskaram to everyone.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): My hearty thanks to you and your team
for giving this one of the most honored opportunity (Sadhguru laughs)
to be with you and to listen to you.
Since I have been a seeker since my childhood
and that is what made me a writer, a storywriter
and that’s what made me screenwriter
and that’s what made me a filmmaker,
where I observe people,
the traditions,
the values and changing people,
I experience them because since time my childhood,
I’ve been living with them.
And whenever I met people,
I felt them,
I observed them
and I could see the changing people from every decade to decade.
In 1940s,
the values of our society
and the values today have been so much different.
I remember if I talk about cinema or film –
because I’m a film director,
so pardon my expression through cinema only (Sadhguru laughs) –
in 1940,
there was a film called Padosi,
where they showed this story of two neighbors.
And one neighbor found the other neighbor in trouble.
His wife was sick,
wanted some medicine, doctor.
This first neighbor went to a dentist
and asked him to pluck his golden teeth,
he sold to the jeweler,
brought the money and gave it to the neighbors
for the treatment of his wife.
Then in fifties, the films came,
when the friends versus friends would the sacrifice for the life,
they would save each other, film like Sangam.
Then sixties came, when there are family relations were explored in human drama,
the Indian families.
And the seventies came,
when the violence erupted,
when the rich man looked like a thief and dishonest man,
and the poor man cried
and Amitabh Bachchan was born (Laughter).
And then eighties,
somehow Mr. Rajesh Khanna, with his romance pacified us.
And so the cinema went on changing the values.
Our hero, heroines,
from Radha, Ganga to Gayatri,
they became Katrina, Kareena (Few laugh)
and so many names now.
So cinema is the reflection of society, Sadhguruji.
So we pick up the stories from them
but there is always a question of mind.
I do connect gurus, mentor like you, from time to time,
to send some social matters
to talk something about my subjects.
So, here I say, Sri Sadhguruji,
you are a guru, I am a student (Sadhguru laughs).
You are a spiritual guide,
I’m a drama writer and a director.
You answer so many question, Sadhguru,
but I question every answer, as a child.
I talk and write about conflicts,
you talk and write about the redemptions, the solutions.
You look at the people as a victim of ignorance,
I look the people of actors of the world.
I complicate their thoughts with various dimensions,
you resolve their thoughts with one dimension by becoming GPS,
our GPS (Laughter/Applause).
I do not know, Guruji, about the finite to infinite,
I do not know the measurable to immeasurable.
For me, beginning is birth, end is death and rest is the journey.
Jo mila voh mila,
jo nahin mila uska kya gila (Referring to Hindi phrase – whatever we got, we got, what we didn’t get, no resentment about it).
I do not know a no man’s land,
a distance from a subconscious to conscious,
as said by some… one of our writer.
I’m a student,
as you were once over also a student.
So, now you are master, a mentor,
I would like to know Sir,
what is a good student
and what is the good guru or a mentor?
How would you define a really good student, bad student,
good guru, bad guru (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: You have already claimed the mantle of being a good student (Laughter),
so I think I am free to claim the mantle of being a good guru
(Laughter/Applause).
I think it’s a deal (Laughter)?
Now, for a good student,
a good student will not look for a good guru because (Laughs)
if you’re a good student,
you learn from everything.
You’re not looking for a good guru.
Even if you meet a very bad one,
you will learn a lot from that.
How you should not be,
that is also important (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes.
Sadhguru: In a way,
this is what happened to me.
When my longing came, I looked.
I met so many people, who claimed to be gurus.
But the only thing I learnt from them was
how a guru should not be (Laughter).
And that’s not...
that’s not a small thing to learn.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes, it’s a very big thing.
Sadhguru: It’s a very big thing.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Like, as a director,
I always tell my technician what not to do,
I never tell them what to do (Both laugh).
Sadhguru: So, for a good student, there is no problem.
Wherever he goes, he will learn.
Whatever he meets, he will learn.
A good guru is one,
who doesn’t teach you anything
but makes you so thirsty, you can’t help learning.
If people come to me thirsty, I don’t give them water,
I put salt in their mouth (Laughter).
They get so thirsty, they got to find it.
Because if you show them something
which is not yet in their experience,
the only choice that somebody has is
either to believe what you say
or disbelieve what you say.
If you believe, you do not get any closer to reality.
If you disbelieve, you will not get any closer to reality.
It is just that if you believe me,
you will have a positive story to tell,
if you disbelieve me,
you will have a negative story to tell.
But you will not be an inch closer to reality.
Above all, I think
putting people into this kind of a dilemma,
either to believe or disbelieve whatever I say or do,
I think it’s obscene.
You should not put people into such a situation.
So, my work is mainly...
You are a seeker but not intense enough.
So, my work is to make you so intense
that it cannot be denied to you.
Because truth is not hiding, you are hiding from it.
Truth is not hiding,
truth is obvious everywhere in the universe.
You are hiding from it because
the intensity of seeking has not happened.
If seeking becomes intense enough,
knowing is not far away
because what you’re seeking is not sitting on Mount Everest,
it’s within you.
So how long does it take?
What is within you, if it takes a lifetime,
of course you’re on a con job, isn’t it (Laughter)?
Yes or no?
It was sitting on Mount Everest,
you could not climb, that’s understandable.
Maybe you don’t have the legs and the lungs to get to the top of the mountain.
But what is within you, if you don’t find,
obviously you’re on a con job or no?
So to get you out of this deception (Laughs) is all my work is.
My work is not to dispense truth.
Who am I to do that (Laughs)?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): This’s so true, so true.
To be on the lighter note, being a film man,
which is your favorite Hindi film (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: Oh!
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): They expect something from me like this (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Oh!
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): To be on lighter note.
Sadhguru: It’s been a very long time since I saw one.
Just recently,
I think on the airline, I saw one.
This is about something in the...
in a Bihari mountain...
I think Manjhi, something?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Manjhi?
Sadhguru: That’s a good movie (Laughs)?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes, Sir (Applause).
And Manjhi copied his getup also, I think.
Sadhguru: I think it was very well done.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes,
I think something like that.
And furthermore lighter, Guru (Laughter),
which is that screen heroine you fell in love in your (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: I’m sorry?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Which is that heroine
film heroine
Sadhguru: Film heroine?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): ... you fell in love in your younger age?
Sadhguru: Me? Oh no.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Now you love human being.
Sadhguru: No,
they were enough girls around in my town (Laughter/Applause).
I didn’t have to look to Mumbai (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Now let’s come to his sphere now, please (Laughter)
is that Guruji has been talking very fondly about his Chamundi Hills.
And I’m fortunate enough to have visited Chamundi hills
and I shot one of my film called Krodhi on Chamundi Hills.
Sadhguru: Oh really (Laughs)?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes Sir.
So, I’m very fond of Mysore locations and all of those,
I made Pardes and all that.
So I remember I was making film called Krodhi in 1978
and there was a scene I shot
because I thought that was the right location for this scene.
Can I explain you one minute the scene part of it?
Sadhguru: Mhmm (Indicating agreement).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): It was a Dharmendra and Pran scene,
that one criminal has entered into the team of saints in disguise,
the Guruji of that team accept him as...
Sadhguru: There’re lot of saints who don’t need any help from outside (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): So there was a scene
when the criminal asked guru,
“Don’t teach me about this god and destiny (Sadhguru laughs) and all this,
I know it all”, he said that.
I wrote the… I wrote dialogues.
He says,
“There must be a very smart and very shrewd guy 1000 years back,
who created these two worlds called god
and the other world called fate.
He created world god because he wanted his children to follow what he said,
what he wants them to believe.
So he made them a fear of god.
And fate he created the world
because when he child fails in following all the principles laid down by him,
he says it is your destiny,
it is your bhagya (Referring to Hindi word – fate).
So I know it all.”
And this was a question he put it to guru.
And guru answered him that
There was one shila in Chamundi Hill we created
and there was some writings on the stones.
He says, “Look at it” (Speaks in Hindi – not transcribed) (Referring to Hindi phrase –
Devotion is nothing but a power.
God is nothing but a man who is great.
Love is nothing but bliss that you and me have to find in one another.)
You have got a wisdom
but there is a layer on you of the worldly pollution.
So you are a man of intellect
but you do not realize the importance of it.
So this is why I remember Chamundi Hills (Sadhguru laughs)
because I wrote this scene there while sitting on the stone.
Sadhguru: Oh, hope not the same rock as me (Laughter/Applause)?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): So I thought that is how you become Sadhguru
because you belong to Chamundi Hill (Laughter).
Thank you, Sir.
Now, my short questions in my mind since my childhood is,
what is the difference between a rich man and a wealthy man?
Who’s really rich man?
Sadhguru: Ahh, one who has the new currency is a rich man (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): So,
you mean to say the man with the old currency has gone poor (Laughter)?
Poorer?
Sadhguru: See, unfortunately, we have brought the world to a place, where
the words like rich or wealth
have become purely economic descriptions.
There was a time when people would talk about wealth of knowledge or
wealth of wisdom.
That’s gone.
Today, if you say wealthy,
people will only understand it as an economic wealth
because in many ways, today,
society is driven by economics.
There was a time (Laughs) when we were overly influenced by the British,
at least we would discuss the weather (Laughter).
Of course, Mumbai weather,
there’s nothing much to discuss (Laughter).
But today,
all conversations are around economy,
everywhere in the world.
Everybody is behaving like an economist these days
because it is the economic engine,
which is driving people’s minds.
It is the economic engine,
which is determining the nature of choices that we make in the world.
It is the economic opportunities, which determine
what... what kind of education people go through.
People are not studying what they want to know,
people are studying that which will fetch them the maximum money.
Yes or no?
Sadhguru: So, maybe a few are still marrying for love (Laughter/Applause).
Everything has become economic.
In United States, a whole lot of people,
before marriage they’re signing a contract
in case we divorce, what’s the deal (Few laugh)?
How can two people become one when this calculation is on?
But the... even the idea of becoming one has been given up.
It’s always two.
The idea and the dream of two people becoming one has been completely given up
because when economic calculation comes,
you become exclusive,
you can’t be inclusive.
So economics are ruling us in every way,
so when you say richness,
when you say wealth,
we’re only talking about money.
Not just richness and wealth,
if you say, “He’s a big man in the town”,
it doesn’t mean that he has a big brain,
it doesn’t mean that he has a big heart,
it means he has a big pocket,
nothing else.
This is a very poor way to exist.
When we do this –
the ladies must know this –
when economics become the main crux of everything that we do,
the feminine will vanish from the world,
or feminine will be subjugated.
If women have to succeed,
they have to become like men.
There is no other way.
Masculine will be everything.
That means world will become utilitarian.
There’ll be no aesthetic,
there’ll be no beauty,
there’ll be no gentleness.
Everything will be a calculation –
what is useful,
what is not useful,
what do I get,
what do you get?
There will be no home,
there will be only a marketplace everywhere.
In the marketplace,
the rules of the marketplace are like this –
if I give less and take more, that means I’m smart.
Yes or no?
If you buy...
you go to the share market, you buy for less and sell it for more,
that is smart.
But life doesn’t work like that.
Life becomes beautiful
only when you’re willing to give it all
and you don’t care what you get (Applause).
Unfortunately, economics means
an organized approach to survival.
Now, we’ve made survival...
When we were in the caves, survival was a big issue.
We organized civilization with so much effort
because we thought we could leave survival behind
and focus on higher dimensions of life.
But once again, we have brought ourselves to a place,
or bringing ourselves to a place,
where survival is supreme.
Nothing else matters now.
Only thing is
we’ve raised the bar of survival in such a way
that it doesn’t matter what you have,
you’re still trying to survive.
Affluent nations in the world,
the Western countries, where
almost every citizen has everything that is needed,
they’re still fighting for survival –
fighting for survival like nobody else (Laughs).
I keep asking the American people,
“You guys, all the time talking about freedom,
where is freedom in your life?
Because even if the most significant dimension appears in your life,
you can’t take a turn.”
I keep joking with them (Laughs),
“You know, some time ago, 2000 years ago,
Jesus came and said, ‘Come, follow me.’
A few people followed him.
But today,
if your Jesus comes back and says, ‘Come follow me’,
where can you follow him?
You have a thirty-five-year mortgage on your house (Laughter),
you have still a student loan at the age of forty-five,
you have a car loan, you have insurance,
you have this.
You’re not going to follow,
you got a bank to go to (Laughter).
You’re not going to follow anything.
It doesn’t matter even if a divine entity arrives,
you cannot change the direction of your life.”
This is not freedom.
Freedom means you should be able to change and alter your life
according to the opportunities that come, isn’t it?
If something truly significant comes,
you should be able to turn around and do something else.
Because we have enshrined economics as the highest value,
all these things are gone.
Everything is about money (Laughs)
and wealth means just money again.
Most of the wealth that we have today in the world
is just made up in people’s minds.
In 2008,
when recession was setting in the Western countries,
I happened to be at Davos at the Economic Forum.
At that year,
India was running a campaign in Switzerland.
The campaign was
“India Everywhere.”
All the American and European business leaders were all looking very depressed because
recession was coming.
That means they had a few billion dollars less than what they had (Laughter)
and they were all very depressed
so depressed means you
very touchy and angry with everything.
Indian people were rubbing it in their face (Laughter).
I get down in Switzerland,
huge hoardings “India Everywhere”,
on the buses, “India Everywhere”,
inside the train, “India Everywhere.”
So it was irritating everybody (Laughter).
So they asked me to handle a session called (Laughs)
Recession and Depression (Laughter).
I said, “Recession is bad enough,
depression is worse.
All of you have always been complaining you don’t have enough free time.
This is the time to walk on the beach (Laughter/Applause).
What are you complaining about?
What is it that we’re complaining about?”
So, there was a Chinese bureaucrat.
See, the way we have structured the economic engine is such,
it is like that Panchatantra story,
where a monkey is sitting on the wrong end of the branch
and chopping the branch.
If it succeeds, it will fall.
That’s how we are right now.
So, I said,
“See, the way you have s... structured this is
if we succeed, we shall fail.
That’s how we are right now because
if you fail, you will be depressed,
if we succeed, the world will be damned.”
Yes,
the way we’re going.
So I said,
“It’s better you’re depressed
because (Laughs) if your ambitions are fulfilled,
there’ll be no planet left.”
That’s where we’re going.
So this Chinese bureaucrat did a wonderful thing.
He...
There was a big mirror.
He put one chair and he said,
“See, there are two chairs –
one chair here, one chair in the mirror.”
They all said yes.
Then he covered up the mirror and he said,
“See, now there’s only one chair.”
They said yes.
Then he said,
“Always there was only one chair (Laughs).
You made it up with a mirror that there are two chairs.
The wealth on the planet is not gone anywhere,
it is just distributing itself a little bit.
Every time it slips out of your hands
and goes to somebody, you will get depressed.”
He was saying it’s moving to China (Laughter/Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Thank you, thank you.
Thank you for sharing the chair also with us (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Here, there are two (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Two chairs.
Thank you very much for saving two chairs.
Now, the other question comes in my mind, Sir,
about the education to children.
There is a slogan going on in our country –
right to educate,
right to education.
And I always feel that more than right to education,
there has to be a right kind of education.
Because educating C-A-T cat is a bat,
it’s not a right education.
Right kind of educations is more important,
that’s what I feel and I say.
Where do we lack
the whole process of education for the so many years,
see… rather century or eighty years
that we have not been living with the intellectual power till now?
We face that...
I say India is not intellect...
is economically poor,
India is intellectually poor at the moment
because there has been a big gap of the whole process of education,
the right kind of educations to all of our children.
What is your take on it, Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: See, India is not... definitely not poor on intellect.
I would say...
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): You are one,
we are thousands.
Sadhguru: No (Few laugh).
I speak to all kinds of people around the world –
business leaders,
academics,
scientists.
But still I would say...
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): When I say, it means ignorance.
Sadhguru: No, at random,
if you pick up hundred people from the street just like that,
either in Mumbai
or Chennai
or Bangalore,
I would say they are way smarter than
most people that you can pick up anywhere in the world (Applause).
Only...
Hey, you shouldn’t clap for yourself like this (Laughter).
I should have left out Mumbai (Laughter).
It is just that we do not have an organization
for this intellect to find expression.
Because there is no necessary structures to find expression,
each person operates...
This is one thing about India,
everybody thinks he’s a genius (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): That’s our education (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: And you will see,
everybody is an expert on everything.
It’s like,
if you go to a local tea shop,
he will tell you how Virat Kohli’s strokes are not perfect (Laughter),
how he should do like this, like that.
He will say how Narendra Modi does not know
how to be a Prime Minister (Laughter),
what he should do.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): We face every time.
A paanwala tells me how to make a story (Laughter).
Sadhguru: He knows everything in the world
but it’s just that he can’t make good tea (Laughter/Applause).
It’s just one little lacuna,
otherwise everything else he’s an expert (Laughter).
We have this as a little bit of an issue in the country.
This is mainly because there is no outlet.
For this enormous intellect that country has,
there is no structures for people to find expression to that.
You just see
Take Indian people and put them anywhere,
they’re just on the tops.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Survivors.
Sadhguru: It’s not about surviving, they’re thriving (Laughs)
because once they find proper structures and they understand the structure,
you can’t stop them
because there is a necessary intellect.
This is a consequence of a very huge history,
a cultural history that we have.
Today, there are experiments to show,
like for example if you...
Let us say you put the smell of this flower on some food substance
and keep it in front of a rat
or a mouse
and when it goes and touches it,
it’ll get an electric shock.
If you do this a few times,
next seven generations,
those rats will not go towards that smell.
All of them understand.
This is their learning.
So similarly, within the human being,
a lot that was done in the past,
which is... which we call as samskara,
that means intrinsic learning that we have,
is still paying off.
Or in other words, we still surviving on old food.
It is time that this generation gets the right stuff.
But that’s not happened yet
because our education systems
and every system that we had
has been disrupted badly in a systematic way
because we’ve been an occupied nation for nearly a 1000 years.
Some came and just ravaged everything.
Others came and systematically destroyed everything.
And they created an education system,
which was mainly towards obedience
and clerical kind of work to serve
Her Majesty’s Service.
In 1947, when we got our independence,
we should have seriously thought about
what kind of education does India need?
We must understand this –
without any infrastructure,
literally without infrastructure,
without any kind of education,
our farmers are producing food for 1.25 billion people (Applause).
This is knowledge.
Why is this not knowledge, I’m asking?
Why is this not knowledge?
Why is this not competence? I (Laughs)
I was talking to a group of CEOs,
I was just telling them,
“See, I’ll give you ten acres of very fertile land.
You do one thing,
I’ll give you a couple of two different crops,
you take out the harvest, let me see.
All of you are MBA, MBA, whatever.
You take out a crop, let me see.”
It’ll freak the hell out of you, I’m telling you.
It’s not easy.
I’ve personally farmed, I know what it takes.
It is...
The more educated you are, the more difficult it becomes (Laughter) –
really
because it takes a very... a very... a close sense of involvement
with what you’re doing.
And from this...
from ploughing the land to the seed to taking the crop out,
it is not a easy process.
But our farmers are just doing it like that
as if it’s just part of their life,
something that they just inherited.
This is a nation with over 12,000 years of agricultural history,
the only land like that on the planet.
In Southern India,
they’re farming the same land for over 12,000 years.
There are certain records, which show this.
So, there is knowledge like this on various levels.
But we have tried to push everything aside
and reinvent the wheel.
Once again, we want to learn ABC
and do it like this.
So, there is a disruption in the intrinsic learning that we have
and the school learning that is coming to us.
I’m saying, just read a book,
however educated you may be,
read a book and make one good sambar, let me see (Laughter).
It won’t come.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yeah. That’s exactly question is, yeah.
Sadhguru: Because we are thinking only what is written in the book,
A + B = C is only knowledge.
Why is not making a wonderful sambar knowledge?
Why is not growing a crop knowledge?
Why is not making a pot knowledge?
We have very constipated sense of what is knowledge (Applause)
because...
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): The school system.
Sadhguru: …because this has come from elsewhere.
Some Indian student in Oxford –
I was just...
not even a month,
three weeks ago I was speaking at the Oxford Union in Oxford University –
one of the Indian students has filed a court petition
that he should be compensated for the boring classes
that they’re teaching in Oxford University (Laughter/Applause).
I was very happy (Laughter).
That’s why I never went (Laughter).
That’s why I never went to the university (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): That amazes me,
that is why the school system, the textbook,
the six answers to the exam,
six questions in the exam,
after studying whole year,
it really amazes me.
That is why I always feel,
what not the internal enlightenment to the children?
Sadhguru: See, the problem is,
why we’re talking about right to education is,
we have...
For example – I don’t know the exact number all over the country –
in Tamil Nadu itself,
we have 9.6 million children in the government schools alone, okay?
9.6 million children.
When you have such vast numbers,
then you have to do something.
What you do for the mass is never the best.
But what to do?
You have to include everybody.
So, some rudimentary sense of education is happening
because at least they must learn to...
If you don’t know this,
seventies and eighties, the objective was,
everybody should know how to write their name.
A campaign was,
literacy means you must know how to write your name.
This is all.
That is, they were trying to move them
from thumb imprint to something written.
It did not change life in any way
but it was a forward movement in a sense.
But we must know this,
when the British came, around two-hundred-and-seventy to three-hundred years ago,
there was not a single illiterate person in this country.
They were amazed because
there were no schoolrooms anywhere,
there was no school infrastructure
but there was no illiterate,
everybody could read and write.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Vidhwan, everybody was vidhwan.
Sadhguru: So they wondered, how does this happen?
Then they realized the system is so organic
that it is simply happening from within.
So the first thing they decided was,
“We must destroy this education system
because if you educate them like this,
they will never become English.”
See, I’m the only Indian left in this hall (Laughter).
So, this system of education that we have inherited
from those who occupied this nation...
See, we must understand this –
you never take advice from your enemy, isn’t it?
If you have some sense, I’m saying (Laughter).
So (Laughs), when they leave your country and go,
first things to overhaul is your political system,
your education system,
your administrative system.
These are things must be overhauled immediately
because they were created for a certain purpose.
For example, even today – the terminology we’re using, I’m saying –
the district administrators in many states including Tamil Nadu are referred to as collectors.
In the British time, they were just tax collectors.
Their only administration was to collect tax
and take it back home.
Even today, our administrators are called collectors.
What are they supposed to collect from us (Laughter)?
I’m saying we didn’t change anything.
We... We were just lazy.
We were just happy that we’ve become free.
But freedom is a terrible thing.
If you do not understand the responsibility of being free,
freedom is a terrible thing.
If somebody is managing our life, it is better,
when we are not responsible.
Only if we’re truly responsible, freedom is a wonderful thing.
Otherwise, freedom is a terrible thing (Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Maturity.
Freedom must come with the maturity. That’s true, Guruji.
I belong to middle class, brought up by middle class family.
And most of us are middle class people.
What is this middle class (Laughter)?
I’m doing well,
I’m educated,
I’m graduate,
still they call me, “You’re middle class” (Sadhguru laughs).
And we, most of us run the country.
Sadhguru: See, this is an aspirational thing.
When large segments of the country were in extreme poverty,
the aspiration was to become middle class.
Middle class means you have college education.
You may not be very rich,
but you’re college educated, you have a job and...
you have a regular job.
Usually, government employees were middle class at one time.
Slowly, others joined up.
Now middle class people are driving Mercedes Benz (Laughter), okay?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Is it in the terms of the economic development,
or the knowledge or the enlightenment,
what is (Sadhguru laughs)...
in which term they are middle class?
Sadhguru: Oh, it was definitely an economic description.
And there was a big goof-up with this middle class.
I think it was in nineties.
A certain US firm came, which was...
I forget the name of the firm...
They came to do a market survey for Ford Motor Company.
And they came here and they said some hundred-million,
two-hundred-million whatever number of middle class families in India,
so Ford can go to India.
No problem
because it has the largest middle class.
So, Ford came and set up the plant at that time.
And they couldn’t sell ten cars (Few laugh).
Then they found out,
a middle class in India is earning 10,000 rupees a month
and he can only cycle to his office,
no question of he buying a car.
It took them a while to understand,
everybody have their own idea of middle class (Few laugh).
They thought middle class means
In America, middle class means somebody who’s earning
somewhere between 60,000... I mean, 30,000 dollars to 100,000 dollars is middle class.
Here, at that time,
India’s middle class is,
if they earn approximately 10-15,000 rupees per month,
they were middle class, which is just three-hundred dollars.
So (Laughs),
everybody has their own idea of middle class.
But we can take this to another place.
Now you are claiming you’re middle class (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Because it always... I wonder...
middle class means naa idhar ke, na udhar ke,
neither this side nor that side.
Neither I’ve an identity, whether it’s poor or rich,
they are clear about themselves.
I am poor guy, he is clear
I’m a rich guy.
The middle class is neither this way nor that way, in what terms.
That was bothering me but you answered...
Sadhguru: Aspiring to be rich but haven’t made it (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): You look at it like that
I a’m taking all the... this golden opportunity to ask you (Sadhguru laughs).
The question which bothers me at times
is about the world called democracy.
What is democracy
and what should be the relationship between the leaders and the people,
the government and the people?
And in growing democracy,
who gets corrupt first,
the leader or the people?
That’s my question (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: See, the… In Tamil, the word for democracy is jananayakam.
That means people are the leaders.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): By the people, for the people, of the people.
Sadhguru: That means there is no leader and there are no people.
People are the leaders.
That’s what democracy means.
Unfortunately, people have forgotten that they are the leaders.
I hear...
Even today morning or yesterday an... evening, I was being interviewed.
Today morning, I was being interviewed by a journalist in Lucknow.
So, he said,
“These politicians!”
I said, “There are no politicians,
they didn’t fall from the sky.
They’re just you and me.
Somebody who’s willing to do the dirty job for you…”
What you think is dirty and you don’t want you yourself or your children to get into,
somebody got into it for you.
Yes (Laughs)?
And once you get there,
the entire game is such that it just dirties your hands, you can’t help it.
It’s become like that, the system.
So in democracy, there is no leader and people,
it’s people and people.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): But obviously, there are leaders and there are people today.
Sadhguru: That is because we have allowed it.
Otherwise, every five years, you could stand up and become a leader,
that’s how it should be.
We have not kept it mobile enough because
we have this tendency of
giving responsibility to somebody and forget about it.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): And forget it for five years.
Sadhguru: Only when something goes wrong, we will scream.
Otherwise, we don’t care a damn (Applause).
No. If you...
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): When it is essential
Sadhguru: If you’re making a movie
or somebody is running a business,
not after something goes wrong you’ll attend to it as a director.
You are on it every moment to see it goes right.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes, Sir.
Sadhguru: So, I am saying,
once you live in a democracy,
you must be an active participant.
It is not a spectator sport, to sit back and forget about it
and then cry when something goes wrong.
I’m telling you, even your home will not run right
if you don’t pay enough attention.
Forget about the nation.
Yes or no?
Even your home,
your own family will become corrupt
if you’re not paying attention to many things.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t like it but it’s true, isn’t it?
If you don’t pay (Laughs) constant attention,
even your home will go bad and corrupt.
So, when this is the thing,
such a large nation,
if everybody doesn’t pay attention to what needs to happen, it will go bad.
Then we cry.
We have this problem –
when small things go wrong, we have somebody here,
when big things go wrong, we have somebody there (Laughter).
This guy (Referring to oneself)...
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Is free... free (Laughter).
Sadhguru: He is never responsible for anything (Laughter).
This has to change (Laughs).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes. But we… I
Sadhguru: See, the most beautiful thing about democracy is
power can change hands without blood flowing.
Never before it’s happened in human history.
Whenever power changes, blood will flow.
Now, power can shift from one group of people
to another group
without blood spilling,
which is a huge achievement (Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): But we as individual need to understand that
I am the part of the democracy
and I’m equally responsible as my leaders are...
Sadhguru: See, I think one mistake we have done is,
in our education systems, in our homes,
there is no awareness about this,
that there are instruments in a democratic process through which
all of us can participate in some way – on a daily basis, if we wish.
This has... This awareness has not been brought to people.
They think if they cast vote once in ten years...
Because one election they’ll miss, you know (Laughter),
then the election day they went to Goa (Laughter),
one they will miss,
one they will vote and they think they are very responsible citizens
because they voted once in ten years.
That’s not how it works. You need an active participation.
Then only democracy will work the way it has to work.
Right now, our idea of leadership is
if we find a good leader, we will start worshipping them.
A good leader does not need worship.
What a leader needs?
If somebody is...
A competent leader comes at the top, what he needs is,
he needs many layers of leadership,
so that he will find traction to what he wishes to do.
But you will see, if a good leader comes,
he will spin on the spot because there is no traction down the line.
Either there are worshipping people or those who’re busy with their own stuff.
So, we need to understand,
democracy means we have taken the nation into our hands.
We need to make it happen.
Somebody will guide it,
somebody will make policies,
somebody will take some decisions,
but the nation is run by the people.
If we don’t get it, then we will always be just complaining,
we will not have a great nation.
If we want a great nation,
we have to stand up and take charge of this country.
Taking charge of the country does not mean
usurping power tomorrow morning.
No.
Where we are, what roles we have to play,
we should be doing our best.
People are always talking about politicians being corrupt.
But I’m asking you,
if there is no policeman on the street,
how many people will stop at the red light?
I think about ten percent.
I’m being generous, I know (Laughter),
about ten percent.
The rest?
If you elect any one of them as a Chief Minister or the Prime Minister, what do you think they will do?
Because they’re law-breakers anyway.
I see... You know, normally I land in Coimbatore late in the night,
ten o’clock, eleven o’clock, one o’clock ,whatever time (Laughs)
and I’m driving from the airport.
Red light, I stop.
There is one little TVS moped guy who’s parked behind me,
kee kee he will do (Laughter).
Then I don’t go till the green light comes,
he comes next to me and says like this (Gestures) (Laughter/Applause).
“What’s wrong with you?”
He thinks I’m a fool, all right?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Exactly,
exactly.
Sadhguru: … his thing is,
“No policeman, what are you doing here?
Go.”
So, if you make these people into...
If you put these people into positions of power, what?
People who’re on positions of power are on spotlight,
so everything that they do is seen.
But corruption is all-pervading, isn’t it?
Within the house,
between a girl child and a boy,
there is a distinction.
This is corruption.
Between a right hand and left hand,
one is superior (Applause), one is inferior. This is corruption.
So, corruption is not just up there taking money or whatever,
corruption is on all levels, isn’t it?
There is no evenhandedness about life.
We’ve brought this to everything.
This has to go means
spiritual process is needed.
If I can (Laughs) share something
I think I must have shared already,
I’ll leave it (Laughs).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Spiritual process is important.
Sadhguru: Because an inclusiveness is needed.
You must transcend looking at things as superior and inferior,
one is higher, one is lower.
You learn to look at everything.
This is one thing that happened to me very early.
I realized I don’t know anything,
so I started paying attention
to just about anything.
One thing I discovered with people around me was,
they could pay attention
or they would pay attention
only to those things that they thought is important.
Rest of it,
they learned to ignore.
I couldn’t do this
because I couldn’t decide what is important.
I found the ant crawling on my...
on the floor was far more important to me
by... than my father, who was asking me to do something at that moment,
I’m saying (Laughs).
Yes, it was.
It is so for your child also. Isn’t it so?
Your child is looking at the ant.
Is he not
Does he not think the ant is more important than you at that moment (Few laugh)?
Yes, he does,
because it’s more interesting than you (Laughter/Applause).
It is (Laughs).
It is the finest piece of mechanics that you can find on the planet.
If you could build an automobile like an ant,
whoa,
it would just go anywhere, you know?
So, I got into this mode of paying attention to just about anything
because it never occurred to me something is more important,
something is less important.
My father believed that he’s a very... he’s a disciplinarian –
tch, so he thought (Laughter).
So evening, seven o’clock to nine o’clock in the evening,
me and my siblings must study something, textbook.
And he will be sitting there reading some magazine or newspaper,
so that we study.
I’ve no issues about all that.
If I just open my book
I just open somewhere (Few laugh).
I never had the habit –
even today, I don’t have the habit –
I always open somewhere.
If I read one page,
I know the author’s mind through and through,
so I don’t read beyond that (Laughter).
So I open somewhere and on the page, I find a small speck of something,
you know,
some flaw in the page.
If I just look at it,
it held my attention.
Entire two hours, I was like this (Laughter),
looking at the spot.
I never read a single word,
nor did I look up anywhere.
I just got absorbed into this little spot.
There was enough in that little spot to keep me engaged for two hours.
Why I’m saying this is,
this is the biggest mistake we’re making with life.
We are setting this up in our children’s minds –
this is god,
this is devil,
this is superior,
this is inferior,
this is mine,
this is not mine.
In this, you’re causing corruption.
You’re bringing corruption to the infant
to recognize one thing as high,
one thing as low,
one thing as mine,
one thing as not mine.
Here, corruption has started.
If you make this child that you brought him up like this into a Prime Minister,
of course he will be corrupt.
Whatever... If you...
By getting into a position of responsibility and power,
it only gets magnified.
Somebody doesn’t just get corrupt the moment they get there.
They’ve been corrupt all their life.
They’ve been trained in corruption by their parents
and their society.
Now, it got magnified because the opportunity is magnified.
So, corruption is not up there,
corruption is everywhere.
If you are concerned about corruption,
just sit at home
and see how many things are there in your life,
which you need to iron out.
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you don’t take this out,
you have no right to complain about corruption
because corruption is in your home,
corruption is in your mind,
corruption is all around you.
It is just that those who’re in positions of power,
you expect them to be clean.
I also do.
But I don’t believe that will happen
unless down the line also we aspire for that in our lives.
Because the kind of people we are,
that’s the kind of leaders we elect, isn’t it?
We have some aspiration to change it
but we are not determined to change it.
Something that is negative,
something that is rotting in a society will not go away
unless we’re determined to change it.
Strong determination to change it,
otherwise it will just go on.
Rot is not something that you can simply get rid of
because rot spreads by itself.
It is cleanliness, which is...
which doesn’t spread by itself.
You have to do the cleaning.
But rot spreads by itself.
So corruption spreads by itself.
If you want to bring cleanliness,
you have to strive.
First of all, bringing it into your life,
otherwise it’s not going to work.
We’ll only talk about it.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Sadhguru, you’re a master of knowledge and history, mythology, everything
and I feel that I’m a child of ancient India.
And I know Indian 1000 years back,
Indian hundred years back
and Indian today
Sadhguru: 1000 years ago, this’s how they looked (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Not to the getup.
How I have changed from 1000 to hundred to today
and why I have changed,
is it a better
or need to be better?
Sadhguru: What is the change, you’re asking?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes,
what’s the change as an Indian,
how much we have changed?
Sadhguru: When we talk about India,
1000 means we’re talking about recent times.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Ancient times.
Sadhguru: Recent.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Recent, 1000 years, yeah.
I say 4000-5000 years.
Sadhguru: So, India as a culture exists for over 12-15,000 years.
At one time, we became a nation with enormous intellect,
enormous capabilities,
very crucible of science, mathematics, astronomy.
The greatest scientists in the world have acknowledged,
modern science could not have taken a single step
without the mathematic that came from India.
So, there were tremendous minds that we evolved because
we had what is called as samskriti.
Today, we have Isha Samskriti school, which is on these lines.
Samskriti means –
sam means equanimous and exuberant,
kriti means way of doing it.
That is, getting life to a place, where it is exuberant and equanimous.
If you keep your life exuberant and equanimous,
now this life will be full-fledged life.
This is the aspiration of every life.
Whether it is an earthworm,
or a bird
or a tree,
all of them are aspiring to become full-fledged life.
So, is a human being.
Only thing is we know what is a full-fledged earthworm,
we know what is a full-fledged bird,
we know what is a full-fledged tree
but we do not know what is a full-fledged human being.
No matter what you become,
still you feel it’s not enough.
It doesn’t matter what you have become.
In somebody else’s eyes, you might have become big.
But within you, you know this is not enough
because what is human is a limitless possibility.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Expansion.
Sadhguru: Because for every other creature, nature has set two lines.
Between these two lines, they live and die.
For a human being, there is only bottom line,
there’s no top line.
So most human beings are suffering their freedom.
If you’re suffering your bondage, understandable.
But if you’re suffering your freedom, that’s a bad thing.
But that’s what is happening.
Human problem is,
“What to do with myself?”
Whatever you do, it’s not enough.
Whatever you do, it’s not enough.
If you had come like any other creature,
your survival taken care of, everything is fine with you, isn’t it?
Eating, sleeping, reproduction, if it happens,
you were fulfilled.
But that is not the thing with human.
When these things are in question, they are big.
Once they happen, they are nothing.
So, this transition, what you’re talking about,
historical movement of human beings in this country,
there was a time when we hit a peak.
But we became so absorbed in finer aspects of life,
what... that we did not have fighting men.
Our biggest strength was,
we were placed in a geographical crucible, where we were well-protected.
We called this Hindustan,
not after a religion, as people think it is today,
or some people think it’s after a language.
No.
A land which lies between Himalayas and the Indu Sagara or the Indian Ocean, this is Hindu.
Why we worship these two geographical features is,
we knew our well-being comes from these two features.
The Himalayan ranges and the Indian Ocean protected us,
so we could focus on the development of the human being.
When every other society was constantly ravaged by external forces,
we remained untouched for a long period of time.
But when people came,
they did not come as invaders.
They just came in few hundreds –
hundred, two-hundred people.
They were actually bandits.
They wanted to rape, loot and run.
But then they found,
people were so docile,
people were deeply involved in spirituality,
mathematics,
music,
astronomy.
Somebody who’s looking at the stars can’t fight.
Someone who is singing music cannot fight (Laughs).
Somebody who’s into, you know, counting numbers
or doing mathematics cannot fight.
They found this was such an easy land.
Bandits became emperors.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): They stayed there only.
Sadhguru: They stayed back.
Why run (Laughs)?
They decided to stay back and they became emperors.
And these are not people with any administrative skills,
they were barbarians.
So, they ruled that way.
So immense suffering happened.
But we had an evolved sense of intellect and philosophy and ideology
through which we survived.
It doesn’t matter how you beat them,
they didn’t fight back but they survived.
They not only survived,
they kept their culture,
they kept their samskriti,
they kept their tradition
to whatever extent they could and survived and survived and survived.
After over a 1000 years of invasions and all kinds of rules over us,
still this is the only culture on the planet,
which still has a flavor of its indigenous origins.
Everybody else is totally wiped out (Applause).
But it has not been easy,
it has not been the best of times.
What was the greatest economic power on the planet
just three-hundred years ago,
we became one of the poorest nations in a matter of two-hundred-and-fifty to three-hundred years.
I think at about two-hundred-and-seventy years,
we became the poorest nation
because everything was shipped out.
But still, we’re coming back once again.
We have an intellect.
We need a determined leadership to wake us up a little bit.
We’re little sleepy, you know?
Because for generations,
ten-fifteen generations,
our mothers have taught us, never confront a problem on the street.
If you see a problem, come home (Laughter).
Yes,
this is what our mothers have taught us
because this is the mentality of an occupied nation –
don’t raise your head,
put it down and come home
because if you raise your head you may lose it.
But if we want to generate leaders in the nation,
we need people who seek problems and confront problems on a daily basis
(Applause).
The moment you seek and confront a problem,
half the nation resists.
It doesn’t matter what’s the problem (Laughs).
See, everybody was talking about black money, all right (Laughter)?
It was one of the conversations always going on.
When they don’t have money,
they would say somebody else has black money.
“The money that I have is white,
what you have must be black” (Laughter) –
this has been the mindset.
But when you try to take some action,
just look at the voices all over.
Is it the best action,
is it the wrong action?
That’s not the point.
We can debate it endlessly.
But the thing is,
it is some action in that direction (Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): We talk about sanskriti,
you said about sanskriti.
And I wonder since my childhood
that in my home and other places also,
I always find pundits chanting Sanskrit mantra.
We get married,
the mantras are all in Sanskrit,
whether we understand them or not.
Sadhguru: You’re not supposed to understand all that (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): That is what I was told.
And everywhere,
I find mantras and pundits,
on all auspicious occasion,
or whatever the occasion is.
And we respect somewhere,
like the back of our mind, we respect our language,
ancient language Sanskrit.
But when it comes to our kids to learn Sanskrit,
we tell them,
“Learn that language, which gives you a job.
This will not give you a job.”
And we are very shy
to allow them to learn Sanskrit.
Why it is so, Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: See, this is… As I said,
we have experienced ten, twelve, almost fifteen generations of abject poverty.
So, when we’re in such a state of poverty,
our only concern is our children should somehow survive.
Somehow get one degree,
get a job –
this used to be the mantra in sixties and seventies.
Get a government job somehow.
Or become a doctor,
that’s the best thing,
your life is made.
Somebody else gets sick but your life is made (Laughter).
This is coming from a certain fear
that your children may not survive.
If they don’t pass this, this, this examination,
they may end up on the street.
Because that’s all the options there were.
They...
It was not a false fear.
If your chi… child did not get educated,
unless he was super talented with something,
most probably he’ll end up as a street bum.
That was a fact.
But slowly things have changed.
Our economic situation has changed dramatically,
whether we want to recognize it or not.
In seventies how you were living and how you are living today,
there is a phenomenal different in the material wealth.
So today, our children have many more options.
We can little go slow on this job-oriented education.
Still, there is a large segment of India,
which still has to go that way.
But we...
Those who’re reasonably well to do
can go little slow on their children.
I created three different dimensions of education.
One is rural education,
which is called Isha Vidhya.
To bring awareness to this,
tomorrow we’re golfing at Wellingdon (Referring to Willingdon Club, Mumbai),
to bring awareness to rural education.
This education is designed purely to get these children
out of their economic and social pit they’re in.
This is,
from the age of six, they’re learning English language.
Within one year, they become fluent in English language
and they start working on the computers.
This English language and computer is their passport out of the village.
This is the goal.
This is run in a certain way.
We have another school called Isha Home School.
This is for the affluent.
This is run in a completely different way
with an enormous inclusion of sport, art, theater,
all kinds of music,
every kind of thing that you can add to aesthetics to it.
The school itself is created in a very aesthetic way,
so the children experience a different dimension of life.
And these children live in groups of twenty in a household
with a dedicated couple,
who are parents for these children for the first five years.
And the next five years, they’ll have another set of parents,
they move into a different house.
These children grow up with enormous exposure to all kinds of talents.
For example, now I made their eleventh and twelfth,
which is two years, into three years.
I said, “In our school, it’s three years”
because we have invested so much
on music, art, dance, theater, all these things.
The moment they come to eleventh standard,
many parents go marks mad.
Suddenly, marks, marks, marks will come,
they want to drop the music,
they want to drop every other art they’ve learnt.
So I said three years.
So extra this one year,
whatever they are good at,
they will become much more proficient in that.
If they are good musicians, they will go into that,
if they’re good in theater, they’ll go into art.
We’re exposing them to leadership, management, business,
variety of things.
But your children will get out of the school one year late.
I think you can afford it because you’re well-to-do,
you have only one child or maybe two children,
it’s all right.
Your child gets to work one year later,
it’s perfectly okay.
Initially, everybody thought it’s crazy,
now everybody wants to be there.
Another dimension of education,
here there is no formal education.
There are only six things that they learn.
They start with yoga,
kalari payattu, which is the mother of all martial arts,
classical music,
classical dance,
Sanskrit language,
English language.
This is all they study.
First four years, these six subjects.
After four years, they will drop any two of them and keep that four.
And after another two-and-a-half to three years’ time,
they’ll drop two more.
And the next five years to six years,
they will do only two subjects.
They will become experts in that.
You must come and see these children.
You won’t believe how they are.
They are incredible because this is focused towards building the human body
and the human brain to its fullest.
If you want something to perform,
first thing is you must build the machine.
You must build the machine to a higher level of capability,
then only it’ll perform.
Right now, the biggest problem with the modern world is
we are too goal-oriented.
We want to enhance our activity without enhancing who we are.
This is why everybody is talking about stress.
Whatever simple jobs they’re doing, they’re stressful
because they have enhanced their activity without enhancing themselves.
It’s like you take your Maruti 800 on a racetrack,
it will fall apart (Laughter).
It’s not built for that, I’m saying.
It’s okay to go to your office.
If you race it, it’ll… it’ll break up.
So similarly, if you want to enhance your activity,
you don’t worry about the activity.
If you enhance the human being,
he will perform the activity according to his capability.
So, this is focused on just developing the human being.
These children are in another zone altogether.
Fantastic!
I
You won’t believe it.
I must tell you this.
The first batch, I was to initiate them about five years ago.
When they become fifteen years of age
They stay with us from the age of six to eighteen.
When they become fifteen,
three years they take brahmacharya.
It is three-year period they must take
and at eighteen, they must go off.
It is not compulsory beyond that –
till that point because we want them to focus.
When I had to initiate them at the age of fifteen,
they go for a sixty days of silence, okay,
total silence (Few applaud) (Laughter).
I have to initiate them,
I want to see how the children are doing.
About three-four days before the initiation,
I go there to see them.
Their schedule is from morning 3:30 to 8:30 in the evening,
okay.
In a day, at least six hours,
they are sitting with their eyes closed
doing sadhana.
And all kinds of sadhana –
at least about eleven to twelve hours of sadhana.
In this, at least six hours, they’re sitting with eyes closed.
So I go there to see them at 3:30 in the morning.
The first batch was only fourteen,
today its grown into big number.
I go there and sit with them.
Nearly half of them are girls and the rest are boys.
I went and sat,
I… I just looked at these children,
they were literally glowing.
I sat there and wept
because I was not like this when I was fifteen,
I know that very well.
These children are literally glowing like lights.
They’re just sitting like this,
unmoving.
I just sat there for over two hours.
They didn’t move a bit,
they just sat like stone.
I just bowed down to them and came that,
this is fantastic (Laughs) (Applause).
They are only fifteen, fifteen year old children (Laughs).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): That is exactly when I said
the right kind of education.
This is the right kind of education.
Sadhguru: Yes, but at the same time,
as I said, we are a huge population.
If we want to improve our education
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): It has to grow.
Sadhguru: If we want to improve our education,
if we want to improve nourishment,
if we want to improve the traffic situation,
if we want to improve anything in this country,
we have to reduce our population.
There is no other way (Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): One very interesting question in my mind I’ve been facing since my childhood
we are talking
all due respect to the belief of every guru and
Sadhguru: No, you don’t have to respect my belief
because I don’t have any (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): When you are talking about the AdiyogI
the great Lord Shiva,
I remember my mother used to go to Lord Shiva’s temple
and I used to accompany her.
And she would tell me that Lord Shiva belongs to the three lokas –
dharti,
akash,
pataal.
So my father brought one globe showing the geography of the earth
and I asked my mother,
“Is Lord Shiva
You’re talking about the three worlds…” –
I turned the globe,
I said –
“Does these Americans know Lord Shiva?”
So is Lord Shiva territorial or universal?
That still question lies in me (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Let’s understand this in the right context.
The word Shiva –
shi-va means that which is not.
That which is, is physical creation.
That which is not, is that which is not physical.
That which is not, where can it be,
in India or America (Few laugh)?
Or on this planet or in another galaxy,
where can it be?
It’s everywhere.
So, there is a dimensionless existence,
so we called it appropriately –
shi-va, that means that which is not.
Today, modern scientists are saying
that nearly ninety-nine percent of the cosmos is empty.
But not that there is nothing –
there is something but it is not something.
Because our idea of something is
we should be able to perceive through five senses.
See right now,
what you can see and what you cannot see is this.
You can see my hand because it is stopping light.
Anything that is not stopping light, you don’t see, isn’t it?
Right now, there is air here, which you’re breathing,
which is most vital from your… for your existence.
But you don’t see it,
you don’t see the air unless you live in Delhi (Laughter/Applause).
That’s the privilege of being in the capital city (Laughter).
Now, if you look up in the sky, you see the stars.
But stars are a small happening.
The real thing is the vast emptiness.
So this we referred to as shi-va, that which is not.
Today, modern scientists are saying
this vast space has a tremendous amount of energy,
but it is not any of the energies that are measurable by us,
like electromagnetic waves,
or weak nuclear energy,
or strong nuclear energy,
or electrical systems,
or microwaves,
none of these things.
It is none of the measurable energies.
But there is no denying it is tremendously powerful.
So we said shi-va means that which is not.
And we said it is in the lap of Shiva that creation happens.
At the same time,
we called Adiyogi also the Shiva
because he perceived that which is not.
You are who you are
People call you a director, a film producer, why?
Because you perceived something.
If you did not perceive that, they would not recognize you as that.
So we recognized Adiyogi as Shiva
because he perceived that which is not.
Because he perceived that, we called him also Shiva.
Then maybe there are any number of people
At least in Southern India,
almost ninety percent of the males are named after Shiva.
We call that man also Shiva
because we know if he does the right things,
he can also realize that he is Shiva.
We named our dog also Shiva.
Yes.
Because we know he is also made of the same stuff,
but he does not know,
but we must remind him by naming him Shiva (Few laugh).
We’ll call the dog also Shiva, Shiva, no problem.
In another country, in another religion,
they would be very insulted if you named your dog by their god’s name.
But you’ll see in the villages,
dogs in
Only in the cities, they have this problem –
all their dogs have English names (Laughter/Applause).
This is because
this pet dog business came from the English people.
For us, dogs were there on the street
and we never taught of taking dogs and fondling them like this (Gestures) (Laughter).
Only the English were doing it
because they were away from home
and they must have been feeling lonely (Laughter).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): That’s the reason, yes.
Sadhguru: Now you see in India,
every so-called middle class family (Laughter/Applause),
all their dogs have English names.
So, we will call the ultimate reality as Shiva,
the one who realized that,
the Adiyogi, as Shiva,
one who did not realize that but has the possibility,
we’ll call him Shiva.
We’ll call the dog also Shiva
because he is also made of the same stuff,
but he cannot know,
but we want him to hear that sound.
So every time we call him Shiva, Shiva, Shiva,
we hope that we will evolve one day (Laughs).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Thank you very much for enlightening us (Applause)
about the real meaning of Shiva, so much
Sadhguru: And for those of you who do not know,
now, on this twenty-fourth of February,
we are unveiling a… a face of Adiyogi,
which is hundred-and-twelve feet tall
because (Applause) Adiyogi
Adiyogi offered one-hundred-and-twelve ways
in which a human being can realize his ultimate potential,
hundred-and-twelve ways to do it.
So as a way of honoring him
and also to bring back this dimension,
that your well-being is not in looking up or looking down
but looking inward….
When we looked up in search of our well-being,
we became hallucinatory.
Then as modern societies,
as science and technology came,
we started looking out for our well-being.
Once we started looking out for our well-being,
in pursuit of human well-being
we have ripped the planet apart.
True well-being will happen to a human being
only when they turn inward.
To bring this revolution back into the world,
for the next generation of people particularly,
we built this iconic face.
And a book is also ready now.
The idea is to move people inward.
Not up,
not out,
in –
in is the only way out (Applause).
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Sadhguru, I
Sadhguru: Can we show the image of Adiyogi, is it possible?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes.
Sadhguru: On the screen?
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): But I must say
Sadhguru: This is the largest face on the planet.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Yes,
I’ve gone through your book,
it’s amazing amazing book and so much enlightenment in it.
But the best line which I found was
that you said in your book,
“Your joy, your miseries, your love, your agony, your bliss,
all lie in your hand.
Some are suffering their failures,
some are suffering their consequences of their success,
some are suffering their limitation
and some are suffering their freedom.”
What’s the way out (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: In is the way out (Laughter/Applause)
because all human experience is caused from within us.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): It’s within us.
Sadhguru: Everything that ever happens to you happens within you.
What happens within you must happen your way, isn’t it?
Right now, we are trying to fix the world to fix this one (Referring to oneself).
It’s not going to work like that.
If you fix this one (Referring to oneself),
then we can create a world the way we want it.
But right now, we think by fixing the world,
this is going to be all right.
It’s not gonna happen like that.
Interviewer (Subhash Ghai): Great, great enlightenment.
Vinita Bali: You know, in the spirit of a freewheeling conversation,
I’m reminded of a film I saw about
I think it was fifteen years ago the film was made
which was a series of conversations with quantum physicists and some mystics,
to use that word.
And the whole premise of the film was that the mystic and the quantum physicist
is seeking an answer to the three basic questions,
which are,
“Who am I,
where have I come from
and where am I going?”
I did not understand the film then (Sadhguru laughs).
I am hoping that you would be able to throw some light on the three questions
and you know, what the physicists and the mystics are seeking?
Sadhguru: So, you are asking me who you are (Laughter)?
Vinita Bali: Kind of.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) See, it’s all right to walk on the street,
point at one of you and say, “Who are you?”
It’s okay.
You go to somebody and say, “Who am I” (Laughter)?
This happened in the Cincinnati airport.
People had lined up to check in at the check-in counter.
One man came briskly,
jumped the line, went straight to the counter and thrust his ticket.
The lady at the counter said, “Sir, there is a line, please.”
He said, “No, no, I’m in a hurry.”
“Well,” she said, “Everybody is in a hurry,
you are all getting on the same plane.
So, please stand in the line.”
Then he raised his voice, “Do you know who I am?”
She looked at him, promptly picked up the microphone and said,
“There is a man here who does not know who he is,
can somebody help him, please” (Laughter/Applause)?
So, you should never address this question to someone else (Laughter).
All this so-called whatever - I don’t know,
I don’t want to make comments
they all picked it up because that Ramana Maharishi’s book I think became famous in California, okay?
everywhere you go, everybody is talking, “Who am I? Who I… Who are you?”
“Who am I?” is a question that should be addressed within you,
digging… every time you ask it,
digging it deeper and deeper and deeper into yourself.
You never go and ask somebody, “Who am I?”
That smacks of something else.
I was (Laughs)… I was teaching a program in Los Angeles
and this is of… like maybe hundred and fifty, two hundred people.
Half of them all are Hollywood types
and a whole lot of them look alike,
many… especially women,
not because they are sisters,
because they have the same doctor (Laughter/Applause).
And I am teaching them an extremely simple process that they need to do every day,
which is just twenty-one minutes, extremely simple.
Just that, they are saying,
“Sadhguru, you’re teaching us all these things
but Ramana Maharishi said,
‘You don’t have to do anything.’” Tch,
ohh, Ramana came all this way from Thiruvannamalai (Laughter/Applause)?
I said, “Yes, he is absolutely correct.
You don’t have to do anything and he did nothing.
He simply sit… sat in one place like this (Gestures), fourteen years.
Rats came and bit into his thighs,
festering wounds,
worms came out of it but he did nothing,
simply sat,”
I said, “You people are made like this
if a mosquito bites you, you’ll call 911 (Laughter).
You don’t talk about doing nothing” (Laughs).
I said, “Ramana talks about doing nothing, leave that,
that’s not your business.
You are made like this,
you don’t talk about doing nothing.”
Ramana talked about “Who am I? who am I?”
You never utter this to anybody.
Don’t ever go and
Please all of you (Laughter), don’t go somewhere and ask them
someone, “Who am I?”
You can ask them, “Who are you” (Laughs)?
So, “Who am I?” is not even a question that you need to articulate.
When… I just said,
the more you know about it,
the better you can exist here.
Not necessarily
Don’t always think about a human being like he is some kind of a machine,
how much he has to produce, there’s no such thing
but how he exists is important.
When you sit here, how are you within yourself is important,
what you wear may be socially important,
what you drive may be important somewhere else,
what you… what kind of home you live in may be important for some other reason
but existentially, there’s only one thing important
how are you within yourself?
Are you pleasant or unpleasant every moment of your life?
In twenty-four hours,
how many moments of pleasantness,
how many moments of unpleasantness
and how much support does it need to keep you pleasant
that’s the question.
Right now, in pursuit of human well-being,
we’ve ripped the planet apart and still, well-being is not happening.
Comfort has happened,
convenience has happened,
well-being for sure has not happened, isn’t it?
As a generation of people,
we are the most comfortable generation ever,
never before anybody could even imagine these things.
But we cannot say we are the most joyful or blissful or ecstatic generation.
No!
Are we worse than others?
I don’t believe so,
every generation - same nonsense.
Some people lived fantastic within themselves,
others went through all the nonsense they had to go through.
This is not because of what’s happening to them.
See there are two kinds of suffering
physical pain can happen to you because somebody may cause something to you,
somebody has no food,
you’re in a war zone or somebody is poking you.
I’m asking all of you
in the last twenty-five years,
how many times it happened to you,
somebody took a knife and poked you?
For most of you, it didn’t happen.
Maybe when you are in… in your school,
somebody poked you with a pin at the most
or you were not even worth that,
nobody poked you (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: They simply poked fun.
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Vinita Bali: They simply poked fun at you.
Sadhguru: Whichever way.
Physically, how many times suffering entered you from outside?
Very, very minimal,
rest is all self-help (Laughter).
You know, in Tamil Nadu, the government has a scheme,
“Namakku name” (Laughter).
“Namagae naavae” (in Kannada), it means.
That means people are on self-help, busy,
causing suffering to themselves daily (Laughter) -
sit, stand, whatever happens.
See, you will see people, most of them are driving their dream machines on Bangalore streets, all right?
How many are driving joyfully?
If we… If the traffic light takes ten more seconds,
they are freaking in their dream machine (Laughter).
Is it not a blessing that you bought this dream machine
after working for whatever number of years,
why don’t you
The traffic is making sure, you stay in your dream machine for a little longer,
what’s your problem (Laughter/Applause)?
I am saying, just about anything people are suffering.
So suffering is not happening because of something else,
it’s simply because
people do not know how to manage their body, their mind, their energies, their emotion, nothing
because no attention has been paid.
No attention to the nature of who you are, has not been paid.
So who you are,
“Who am I?” question is internally
entirely internalized question.
Never to be uttered,
never to be written down.
Unfortunately, somebody printed it and the whole world is talking,
“Who am I?
Who am I” (Laughs)?
You (Laughs)
This is okay if you’re a (an?) inpatient.
If you’re an inpatient, in NIMHANS (Referring to National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore)
you ask, “Who am I?” (Laughter), that’s allowed, that’s allowed.
If you are out on the street, you are not allowed to ask, “Who am I” (Laughs)?
You get me (Laughs)?
Vinita Bali: You’ve also talked about
Sadhguru: No, there are other two questions in that (Laughter/Applause).
Vinita Bali: Yes. Yes, yes,
I’m waiting for those two questions.
Sadhguru: Where are you going (Laughter)?
There’s only one way to find out, you must go and see (Laughter).
As I was saying just now, some things are best known only by experience.
People want to know, “After my death, what will happen?”
I tell them, you must know by experience (Laughter).
Are you ready?
No.
Then don’t worry, wait (Laughter).
“Where did I come from?”
See essentially, what you are asking is,
all three… three questions put together,
you are asking
“What is the nature of my existence?
Am I this body,
am I this,
am I that,
what am I,
what is the nature?”
Because whichever way you look at it, you can prove “I’m that”,
because for everything there’s some substance.
You can prove yourself to be a woman,
you can say, “I’m not this, I’m a human being,”
you can say, “I’m just a piece of life,”
you can say, “I’m god,”
somebody may think you are something else.
Doesn’t matter (Laughs) but
for everything, there is some substance,
so you can argue for it but that’s not the point.
Really, what is the nature of your existence?
Don’t take this as some kind of a great philosophical or spiritual question.
Please see it as a practical thing.
If you want to know how to use this camera well,
the more you know about it, the better it is.
You agree with me?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Similarly if you want to use this (Referring to oneself),
if you want to use this human being properly,
the more you know about it, the better it is.
So, self realization is a very practical thing, not an esoteric thing.
What you think is esoteric is
All the things that you don’t have an understanding of,
you want to make it esoteric
or you want to make it mystical.
Let’s understand this word mysticism or mystical.
Anything that you don’t understand will look mystical to you, isn’t it?
Suppose you don’t know what’s electricity,
you have no concept of that,
now I press something here (Gestures), boom, lights come on.
Very mystical for you, isn’t it?
See, if I just had a light bulb a thousand years ago,
I could have claimed, “I am god” and it would have worked.
Tch, came too late, you know (Laughter)?
So, the more you know about it,
the better you will live.
This is not something that you seek at the end your life,
this should be the first step of your life,
if you value your life.
Yes?
Knowing this (Referring to oneself) should be the first step of your life.
Very beginning of your life, this question should be asked.
Can I tell you a story?
Vinita Bali: Please.
Sadhguru: There was a… a Bishop in the Greek Catholic order.
The Greek Orthodox church believes they are the only real Christians,
others are not really Christians.
They think they are the only pure Christians, others are not really that.
They have their own pope in Istanbul.
So, it became a very small group over a period of time (Laughs) for whatever reasons.
So, being on the Silk Route,
many fantastic stories from India are wafting across the Bosporus
and these stories are going on about the mystics and the yogis and the magic of India,
which the Indians have not seen and everybody else has seen (Laughter).
So, he always wanted to go to India
but being a man of cloth,
he could not really choose where to go.
After sixty years of age, when his… when he is semi-retired,
he got an opportunity and he came to southern India
and he found the right kind of guides,
somebody told him, “You go up this mountain,”
and they gave him the landmarks and
“Here, there’s one yogi, he is the right one to meet for you.”
So he climbed up the mountain.
The man is not made for mountains, you know?
Mountains demand certain things from you (Laughs).
So, he went up and as they had said, there was a yogi, sitting in front of a cave,
blissed out.
He went and he had heard that if you see a Indian yogi,
you have to prostrate, tch,
but for that also you need some fitness.
This is a part of the Indian thing because
that’s the only exercise most Indians do (Laughter).
So, whatever you see, you just bow down
but now they have learnt (Gestures) (Laughter).
Vinita Bali: A short cut there too.
Sadhguru: Yes, the idea is to touch the floor.
Every time, every time you keep doing it through the day,
it’s a good exercise,
you don’t have to spend extra time for exercise.
So, he struggled and scraping himself and sat up.
All this commotion,
the yogi opened his eyes and smiled.
So, the bishop asked, “Can I ask you a question?”
The yogi said, “By all means.”
The bishop asked, “What is life?”
this is after sixty (Laughter),
the damn question you should have asked when you were six,
at least sixteen. you must have asked.
No,
sixty, all right, better late than never, some time you asked.
So, when he asked this question, “What is life?”
the yogi went into raptures and then he said,
“Life
Life is like the fragrance of jasmine upon gentle spring breeze.”
The bishop looked like this (Gestures),
“What! Fragrance of jasmine on gentle spring breeze
but our teacher told us,
‘Life is like a thorn. Once it gets into you.
If you sit, it hurts,
if you lie down, it hurts,
if you stand up, it hurts’ (Laughter)
and you are saying it is fragrance of jasmine, spring breeze and all this stuff.”
The yogi smiled and said,
“Well! That’s his life” (Laughter/Applause).
So, we have never paid attention to the most important dimension of who you are
and you do not know life any other way than the way it happens within you,
yes?
You are the only doorway to the existence for yourself,
you can only experience through this mechanism and no other way.
If you don’t know this (Referring to oneself),
what the hell are you doing here?
And just because you know this (Referring to oneself),
people label you as a mystic, as this,
he is that
and many people mispronounce it (Laughs),
as a mistake, you know (Laughter)?
AnupamKher: I feel very proud to be an Indian
and I’m sure lot of people feel,
but corruption bothers me
and I'm sure you also spoke about it.
How
Do you think spirituality can help get rid of corruption to some extent?
Sadhguru: See, let’s understand this corruption,
because its
it’s a very important thing that everybody understands this properly
in its right perspective rather than reacting against a bunch of people
who are in an advantageous position, okay? (Laughter)
Why I want you to understand this is
because for the first time in the history of independent India,
these sixty four years, that means two generations of people
they have… at least fifty to sixty percent of them have had such a bad deal.
Today you and me, will talk all this and go home and eat well.
There’s a whole bunch of people,
almost four hundred million people who cannot do that.
So if we handle the next five to ten years right, we can change that.
It’s a tremendous possibility which is on our threshold.
There’s an economic possibility sitting on the threshold.
If we conduct this right, we can change their lives,
those people who have not eaten properly,
those children who are malnourished
which is of the highest level of malnourishment,
those who are not educated, those who don’t have opportunities,
those who are in that horrible social and economic pit,
their lives can change in the next five to ten years
if we conduct our act right.
Every Indian should understand this –
it is not just about economy means stock market,
it is about hungry people who will have food on their plate.
Economy does not mean stock market.
Economy does not mean foreign cars coming into India.
Economy does not mean you wear better clothes or this and that.
Improving economy means there will be no hungry children in the country,
which is something all of us should do something about (Applause),
and that possibility
that possibility is being jeopardized.
Wherever I go I speak to various economic and political leaders around the world
everybody says, ‘We want to come to India. India is a big possibility,
but the humiliation of corruption,
we can’t bear it.’
Because it’s not just about money.
They’re willing to pay a percentage and get the work done,
but the humiliation that they’re put through on a daily basis,
which we have gotten used to,
they’re not willing to go through that,
they said, ‘It doesn’t matter if we don’t do business,
but we don’t want to come there and go through all that rubbish.’
So this possibility is being jeopardized by a handful of people,
or it is wrong to say it’s a handful of people –
it’s a nation-full of corruption,
because how many people in Mumbai streets, if there is no policemen,
will stop at the red light?
I think only ten percent will stop.
So these ninety percent are corrupt people.
If they make… If you make them the chief ministers and prime ministers
you know what they will do. (Applause)
So instead of just calling it by one bad word called ‘corruption’,
we need to understand we as a society are trying to move
from a feudalistic way of managing our lives to a democratic way.
The democratic way has still not sunk into us.
So I’m saying in our psyche we are still feudalistic in nature,
but we are trying to run a democracy.
Democracy will not happen without
an active sense of education as to what is democracy,
what is the power of democracy,
what it means,
–
what is the responsibility of living in a democratic society
this has not been done,
we just took democracy from the British and
we think if they just put their vote and get their fingers dirty once in five years,
everything is settled.
No, we have not educated people.
We are still a feudalistic society acting to be democratic
(Anupam Kher): So how do we
How do we do that?
Means it’s a
Sadhguru: It is… it is only because
common people are not participating in the democratic process.
Yes
Participating in the democratic process does not just mean once in five years
you cast your vote – most people don’t even do that –
but I’m saying even if you do that, that is not enough.
Democracy is an active sport;
it’s not a spectator’s sport.
You can’t sit back and say ‘Let somebody do democracy.’
Democracy means you are the boss,
you can’t sleep on it,
you have to be active to everything around you.
If you do not bring that consciousness in people,
that awareness and activism in people, it’ll not work.
At the same time, for everything you protest, for everything you call a bandh,
for everything, you know, it’s our culture.
People have understood the technology of how to stop the nation – bandh, hartaal –
but how to run the nation, it’s a different technology. (Applause)
I am saying, at least once a month in your street, in your region,
whatever is the sticking points in your area, in your street, just make a list of that,
get a few people together, whoever the councilor, the MLA,
call him for a meeting, talk to him what needs to happen.
Casting vote once in five years is not good enough,
because you employ somebody and you don’t see that he works
that is not… doesn’t make sense, isn't it? (Applause)
AnupamKher: Do you get angry?
Sadhguru: You want me to right now? (Laughter)
It’s not that I am incapable of anger;
I am capable of everything.
It is just that I have not given this privilege to anybody
that they can make me angry, they can make me happy,
they can make me unhappy,
they can make me miserable;
I’ve not give this privilege to anybody. (Laughter & Applause)
If... if somebody need to be shouted at, boom I’ll go. (Laughs)
AnupamKher: So what makes you angry?
Sadhguru: It doesn’t make me angry.
If they need a shouting I’ll give it to them.
See, there are different kinds of people in the world.
There is somebody here, if I just look at them they’ll understand why they’re being looked at.
There’s somebody here, if you look at them they’ll just stare back at you. (Laughter)
If you tell them gently they will understand.
There is somebody here, if you tell them gently they won’t get it, you have to shout at them.
There is somebody else here, even if you shout you won't... they won’t get it,
you have to knock them on their head and tell them.
Different levels of sensitivity in the world.
Your action should be appropriate to the situations in which you exist.
I am not bound like this,
‘I will not say this, I will be gentle, I will be nice,’ I have no such things.
I am just appropriate to the situations in which I exist.
What you need, I will do. (Laughs)
If you need only shouting I will do. (Laughs)
What’s my problem?
AnupamKher: What’s your shortcoming?
Sadhguru: Hmm? My shortcoming is I am not tall enough. (Laughter)
AnupamKher: You are the tallest man right now over here, we know that.
Sadhguru: I came little short.
AnupamKher: Do you feel lonely?
Sadhguru: Lonely?
when you’re alone, if you feel lonely,
obviously you’re in bad company, isn't it? (Laughter & Applause)
AnupamKher: It’s a great journey to be talking to you
If you have to describe yourself in one word,
what will that word be?
So if Sadhguru has to decide and if he has to tell me to describe himself in one word,
one that… apart from mystic. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: Would you consider ‘wildlife’ as two words or one word? (Laughter)
AnupamKher: What is the word?
What’s
Sadhguru: Wildlife.
AnupamKher: It’s… for you it’s one word. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: One word.
So life... life, uncultured,
uncultivated just wild and as it is, that’s me. (Laughter & Applause)
AnupamKher: You are very warm also
Sadhguru: Just life nothing else.
AnupamKher: It has been very enriching talking to you, I must say that I feel rich.
AnupamKher: I grew up in these lower middle class family,
small town,
as a child I had a great sense of wonder about everything.
I, till today, have a great sense of wonder,
I am happy to be talking to you.
I don’t see that in today’s children.
I don’t see a sense of wonder in today’s children.
I think because they are
Sadhguru: Because they replaced the wonder with ‘www.’
(Laughter & Applause)
AnupamKher: Exactly,
exactly that’s right!
Sadhguru: They know the whole universe before they are six.
AnupamKher: Exactly that’s... How do
I am sure parents… they know everything.
They just to have to press Google and all the information
but information does not necessarily translate into knowledge at all.
So how do – and they always say this,
‘That’s the way I am!’
I don’t see my grandfather even at the age of eighty-four said,
‘Ah that’s the way I am!’
So what is this, ‘That’s the way I am
I am,’ ‘bored,’ ‘dude,’ ‘cool’?
I think that to be bad is being cool.
If you say, ‘I am a good man,’ he is a boring man.
Sadhguru: Usually they are. (Laughter & Applause)
People who claim that they are good people usually they are boring.
AnupamKher: Yeah they are for the world,
for the marketing part of it.
we are becoming people who are constantly made to feel,
suddenly in India also that we are living in a world
which is not very, very peaceful,
which is not to be… which is a dangerous world,
we are becoming, pardon my saying, like America,
where we don’t look at somebody for a little longer.
I was in America two years back,
I was looking at somebody thinking
whether should I ask him my hotel –
because in my hotel there was a mall, so I went into the mall,
and when I came out I could not see my hotel
because I must have got off from somewhere else.
So I was looking at somebody to ask him
whether should I ask him where my hotel is.
So he said
Sadhguru: ‘What are you staring at me?’
AnupamKher: ‘What are you staring at?’
I being an actor I said, ‘Am I staring at you sir,
I’m sorry, I did not know I was staring at you.’
Poor fellow actually dropped me to my hotel. (Laughter)
What my point is...
how do you retain,
how does one in today’s time in these times retain
a certain amount of innocence,
a certain amount of sense of wonder?
How does one do that?
Sadhguru: See now there are two things you said
wonder and innocence.
Wonder does not necessarily come from innocence.
See for example
When you were a child you definitely looked up at the sky, isn't it?
AnupamKher: Absolutely.
Sadhguru: Did you ever count the stars?
AnupamKher: I used to do that in Simla there was nothing to do.
Sadhguru: How far did you go?
AnupamKher: Oh, no, no, nothing
I could not go beyond hundred or two hundred.
Sadhguru:Ahhh
So I meticulously sat down on the terrace,
counting, counting, counting,
trying to make, you know, segments of the sky
and trying to count, count count.
I’ve gone up to seventeen hundred
and then you get mixed up.
What was there is not there, what was not there has come.
You know it gets all mixed up.
But today - that itself was wonder,
seventeen hundred just blew my mind –
today scientists are telling you
there are over hundred billion galaxies, not stars,
hundred billion galaxies.
So as you explore,
as you know the wonder will increase
because you realize the nature of the existence,
then wonder will just explode.
So wonder is gone not because of lack of innocence
or because of innocence,
because what we call as knowledge –
stupid conclusions about life.
Nobody is
today people are carrying their
attention deficiency like a qualification.
See existence will yield to you
only if you pay attention to something.
Anything in this existence will yield to you
only if you pay substantial attention to it.
But now people have become like this,
they can’t look at anything,
everything is chukchukchukchuk.
Now in this condition there will be no wonder,
only conclusions in your head.
There is no perception,
there is only,
you know monologues going on in your head,
there is no perception.
If there is perception all noise in your head will just stop.
If you’re looking at something absolutely beautiful and engaging everything stops.
Why people are enjoying your cinema is just this,
you switch off the lights, they’re focused on the thing
for those whatever few minutes or ninety minutes or whatever,
their usual monologues are gone,
something else is happening.
it is the attention which is making the difference,
it is not what play... what’s playing on the screen.
It is what is playing on the screen is instrumental
in grabbing the attention
but it is the attention, continuous attention
which is making the experience of being there.
So this is a rudimentary form of meditation.
It’s called dharana,
AnupamKher: So how does one in today’s time retain that attention span?
Sadhguru: One simple thing is
Everybody must do something about themselves.
Every child, every school should bring this dimension
that a child is required to pay attention to something continuously.
It could be music;
it could be dance.
See you cannot do music or dance
unless you pay attention to it you know.
You’ll make a fool of yourself if do not pay enough attention.
But you can pass an examination without attention.
You understand? (Laughs)
Above all, if you just
I’ve seen this simple thing,
children came to us… we have a Isha Home School,
which is a very… run in a very different way.
I one day went to the Assembly hall,
these six, six-and-a-half year old kids,
they’re all like this (Gestures), like this, like this.
I said, ‘Why are the kids like broken tops?
Why are they shaking around like this?’
Then I just brought this thing,
simply every day in the morning,
‘Sariga ma pa da nisa,’ fifteen minutes,
everybody must do.
You go there after two months they’re all sitting like this. (Gestures)
That’s all it takes.
If you just make them walk in the forest in the night,
one night, okay, in the darkness you just make them walk,
you will see they will become like this. (Gestures)
Their ability to pay attention will become like that.
Their sense of wonder will explode.
You just take them into the jungle,
make them walk for a night,
without torches,
without cell-phones,
without anything, in a protected atmosphere,
you will see within one night
there’ll be a tremendous transformation
in the sense of wonder in the child’s life.
But we are making them physically incapable of these things.
Sitting just in front of the computers
they are becoming physically incapable.
When physically it hurts they will protest;
they will not do anything.
So it’s something that parents must take care off.
Bringing up your child does not mean just sending him to school
and getting marks and grades and nonsense.
Your child in body and mind should grow up to full capabilities.
That is when it’ll manifest in his life as success.
Just marks will not manifest as success.
[Questioner] Sadhguru, if the Creation is perfect, and the Creator has done
such a good job on us, as you say why is there so much suffering in the world?
Why do we need to depend on somebody's compassion to exist here?
[Sadhguru] So if creator had done a good job on us,
why, why there is so much suffering in the world?
Why we need to depend on other people's compassion
and understanding to exist here?
This is like... it happened once: A little boy came home with a ten-dollar bill... - what Luke? - ...in Ohio.
A little boy came home with a ten-dollar bill.
His mother asked, he said, 'I found it.' His mother asked, 'Luke, did you really find it?
Are you sure?' He said, 'Sure maam, I even saw the man looking for it.'
Why there is so much misery if this is a perfect job?
It is such a perfect job, that it gives you the opportunity to be whichever way you wish to be.
If Creation had not given you the necessary opportunity to be what you wish to be,
then there would be no possibilities, isn't it?
Then there would be no such thing as liberation.
So why create a bondage and then liberation?
Why couldn't we be liberated? Then there would be no Creation.
Only because there is Creation, now the possibility of going beyond that.
Now in animal nature and in other forms of life
that you see around you, every kind, there is not much possibility.
The possibility is just to survive, procreate, carry on with life and die one day.
Because there is not much possibility, there is not much misery either.
You don't see other creatures of the planet suffering like human beings.
Their suffering is purely physical. If they are physically harmed, they're in pain.
Even in pain, they do not know the kind of suffering that a human being knows.
Human being knows this suffering not because Creation gave
this suffering to you. Creation just gave you the freedom
to make whatever you wish to out of yourself.
You're making suffering out of yourself, or a large population
of the world has decided to make suffering out of themselves; that is their choice.
Physical realities sometimes are comfortable; sometimes are not comfortable. That is so.
We have been given the necessary intelligence to create the necessary comfort for ourselves.
That's not an issue really.
If we have no problems with each other, creating comfort
for all the population in the world is not a problem.
It's not at all a big problem really. Simply because
we have inner problems, simply because this freedom
which should have been a benediction, has become a curse upon humanity.
Right now, what human beings are suffering is not their bondage; they are suffering their freedom.
If you suffer your bondage, it's all right, but if you suffer your freedom, that's tragedy.
Right now human beings are unfortunately suffering their freedom.
This moment you can make anything out of yourself.
You can make joy out of yourself; you can make suffering out of yourself. What to do?
if 50 percent of people or 90 percent of the people are choosing to make misery out of themselves.
That's not Creation's fault. Just gave you the freedom so that you could go beyond.
Once you have come as a human, you're not trapped anymore.
Other creatures are trapped in their own instincts, beyond that they cannot think.
You have instincts for survival, but still you have the possibility of going beyond these instincts.
If you don't choose to go beyond, that means still enough suffering
has not touched you, because it's unfortunate in the world that
very few people transcend out of their intelligence.
Most people have to be thrashed by life; only then they will transcend.
Only then they will think of going beyond, otherwise no.
I don't know you are aware of this Luke, you came early, but in India if you tell
somebody that 'I'm living in an ashram', they will ask you,
'Why, what went wrong? What happened to your life?'
So they believe that only after something really goes wrong you will go to the ashram, okay.
Because most people's intelligence is such, because they kept their brains in cold storage,
They think they are going to use it in the future.
So they can only seek anything beyond when something really goes wrong with their life.
Till then, even if something really goes wrong, they will only pray for a better life next time.
Now, you don't have to depend on anybody's compassion or understanding.
The whole world can live under the umbrella of your compassion and your understanding.
I would like to see that you stand up that way:
That the world lives under your compassion and understanding.
You don't live in other people's compassion and understanding.
If you have any dignity, that's how you should live. Isn't it?
Isn't it so?
Sadhguru: See the fundamental flaw in this entire process is,
without enhancing yourself
you’re trying to enhance your activity.
It's like
You’re from UK, hmm?
Interviewer: Scotland, yes.
Sadhguru: Scotland.
You take a junk Vauxhall
and try to drive it on the F1 track.
It's bound to fall apart.
Instead of dreaming of winning an F1 race,
if you build a machine
which is capable of doing whatever
your intelligence allows to build, whatever kind,
if you build one, then it’ll do whatever it does.
Whether it wins or not is subject to what others have done
whether you win a race or not,
simply depends on how good or bad other people are.
but
when we do something,
are we functioning from the highest possibility within us
or from the lowest possibility
or somewhere in between is, the big question.
And the biggest question in human life is
you do not know what is your highest possibility.
For every other creature on this planet,
nature has drawn two lines,
within that they live and go.
For the human being there is only bottom line,
there’s no top line.
So it doesn’t matter what you become,
you still don’t know whether you have hit the peak or not.
Only those people
who are only interested in winning races with other crippled people
they have hit the peak
But any genuine human being who is exploring his own nature,
you never know if you’ve hit your peak
because there is still room,
do no matter what you have done.
So, enhancing the machine,
this human mechanism, is most important.
Whether you win the race or not,
whether you did this or not is not important.
If you have this enhanced,
everything that you do will be enhanced.
People around you think you are super human
simply because everything that you do seems to be of a different nature,
of a different quality that they can't imagine.
Not because you’re intending to
to do things better than other people,
simply because you have spent time to enhance this one
So this is a fundamental flaw
in the attitude with which people are entering the world.
Instead of building a great mechanism which will
whatever it does will be of a great possibility,
people are trying to do great things,
which is
which is going to kill them.
That’s why successful people are miserable.
Somehow they have managed to do something
and it's taking such a big toll on them
Sadhgur: No confidence.
Sadhguru: Yes. So that’s the thing.
The only quality is clarity.
People think confidence is a substitute for clarity.
That’s a biggest disaster.
The great disaster in the planet is
people who have no clarity have confidence
Sadhguru: So that’s why all the loud advertising
because there is no clarity but there is confidence
See, you are who you are
only because of whatever you might have perceived.
What you’ve…. What you have not perceived is not you, isn't it?
Simon Kemp: I like that.
Sadhguru: You… See,
whether you’re consciously aware of this or not,
how people experience you right now is –
whatever you have perceived,
in whichever way it's finding expression,
that is what people’s experience of you are
and that is what your experience of yourself is.
Whatever you have perceived, that’s all.
Instead of enhancing perception,
we are trying to enhance, again, expression.
You’re
You’re in the social s… media stuff.
Everybody wants to express anything and everything,
no matter whether they know something
or don’t know something,
everybody wants to express.
This is the age of expression without perception.
It's a disaster
People are becoming who they are
because of what they express,
not because of what they have perceived.
If… You are who you are
because essentially in life,
the nature of life is such,
only what … you have perceived is you.
But right now,
because you pick bits and pieces all over the world,
you can express all kinds of things that you don’t know.
See, today a twelve-year-old child looks bored
Never before it was so,
it's only in this generation
because he’s seen the cosmos through his phone screen.
He knows everything,
there is nothing he does not know.
Simon Kemp: The facts are all there but maybe they have not
Sadhguru: They’re not facts
They are not facts.
You… You call them facts.
All right, you call them facts if you want to
but I’m saying me knowing
how many million light- years away is a particular galaxy
which we call as Z-1-27
is not knowledge.
Whether it's ten million light-years or hundred million light-years
makes no difference
because in my perception there is no way
to experience a light-year first of all.
It's… It's all conceptual.
It is not experiential.
Unless your perception is experiential
it doesn’t enhance you.
It is just accumulation.
Like people accumulate wealth, money,
useless things all over,
trinkets,
people are accumulating knowledge or information
trinkets which will make them look smart in a tea party.
Only in comparison to somebody else who does not know
where galaxy Z-1-27 is.
Simon Kemp: Okay. So based on that… that concept of
Sadhguru: It's not a concept.
Sadhguru: Information.
Sadhguru: When you bite so much
you will bloat
Simon Kemp: This is true.
Sadhguru: …and get unhealthy .
Sadhguru: See, in this question, there’s a fundamental flaw.
Simon Kemp: Okay
Sadhguru: In the sense,
because you belong to a generation which is goal-oriented.
Simon Kemp: True.
Sadhguru: Goal-oriented means
you are interested in the mango,
the sweetness of the mango
but you are not interested in the tree.
because slowly you are living in a generation
where mango comes from a supermarket, not from a tree.
It may so happen in a laboratory they will make a mango,
all right.
But if you want mangoes in your garden,
you don’t have to think mangoes,
you don’t have to meditate upon mangoes.
You have to think soil,
filth, manure, water, sunlight.
No mangoes in your mind
you have only manure, soil, water, sunlight in your mind,
mangoes will happen.
Or in other words,
you are too interested in the consequence
but not in the process which causes the consequence.
This is goal-orientedness.
In yoga, we say
if you have one eye on the goal,
you have only one eye to find your way –
it's inefficient.
If you use both your eyes to find your way,
according to your capability,
you will go as far as you can go.
That means you are not concerned how far somebody’s going,
you want to go as far as you can go.
That’s what you’re interested in.
But right now, this goal-orientedness means
you’re only interested in going
one step further than your neighbor.
Or in other words, the only joy that you have in your life is
somebody is doing worse than you.
I think that’s a sick mind.
Sadhguru: From digital to divine .
Sadhguru: See, tell me
tell me one thing.
You can look at Mr. Bolt, you know
You could look at Mr. Bolt for the inspiration, all right?
But if you try to run like him,
you will break your legs –
that’s all that’ll happen.
For inspiration, you can look at Mr. Bolt –
perfectly fine.
You can look at Mr. Sachin Tendulkar for inspiration.
You try to go and face a ball
which is coming at hundred-and-sixty kilometers per hour –
a hard ball –
you will kill yourself,
really.
Most people know cricket only on television,
so they think it’s a nice game.
Go and stand there –
it's the most violent game.
Simon Kemp: It’s terrifying.
Sadhguru: Projectiles are coming at you at tremendous speed,
giving you a fraction of a second to react and hit the ball.
Because they see it only on television, they think
it's a nice, beautiful game. No, it's
Among all the games that are popular today in the world,
it is the most dangerous game.
Nowhere else any hard ball is coming at you at that speed.
Really, it
Most of the time coming at your head
Simon Kemp: There is a certain degree of animosity the way that this
Sadhguru: No, no. I’m… I’m saying
because somebody mastered that
with…. Well, he was talking to you
about the level of dedication right from his childhood,
how he’s involved.
So Tendulkar is Tendulkar, all right?
You can use him as an inspiration
but you don’t try to do what he is doing today afternoon
because you will be dead.
Yes.
So, you can use a high level of whatever,
somebody has set a goal,
as an inspiration.
Somebody is running a hundred meters in eight seconds,
you can use it as a inspiration.
Don’t try to do it
It's like a Vauxhall trying to be a Ferrari
Sadhguru: Mhmm
That’s…. That’s the biggest mistake because who knows?
Maybe you can hit the ball better than Tendulkar.
Right now, why do you want to limit yourself to Tendulkar standards?
There was a time,
nobody believed that you will reach hundred in a cricket game,
only after thirty-five to forty overs.
I remember this change that happened.
First time Sanath Jayasuriya hit the ball –
within the first twenty overs, hundred.
Now people are hitting it within eight, nine overs.
Okay
Simon Kemp: (Sounds like – The rules have changed?)
Sadhguru: Because they’re not thinking about
what somebody did.
You hit the ball according to your capability.
Who knows,
maybe you will hit it better than Tendulkar,
we don’t know.
The possibility is there.
In reality, there may be a distance, that’s different.
But the possibility is there.
So if you become goal-oriented,
your goals are always determined by other people’s capabilities.
you will never do
what you could have done.
Maybe you can't hit a ball,
maybe you could do something else
way better than anybody else.
But you will never do that
because you go on trying to hit the ball
that you can't hit
Sadhguru: Market people cannot access it
Sadhguru: Human… Human beings can, markets cannot.
few times when I was at the Economic Forum,
the World Economic Forum,
people keep on referring to India as ‘emerging market.’
I said, “Don’t refer to us as a market.
We are not a marketplace.”
Once you think somebody is market,
how are you going to approach them?
You’re going to put some nonsense that you have created,
try to convince them
they must drink this, or eat this,
or buy this, or use it, or whatever.
If I saw you as a human being
and I’m concerned about you and your well-being,
I would see what you need.
If I do what I… what you need
If I manufacture what you need,
I don’t have to market it.
Market-man will go out.
Manufacturing is all that’s needed
But right now, you’re doing something that people don’t need
and you have to convince them that they need it.
It's very clear,
even a kindergarten child knows that
this body doesn’t need carbon dioxide, it needs oxygen.
But somebody is putting carbon dioxide in the bottle
and calling it ‘the real thing’
so they need marketing.
Marketing department is bigger than the manufacturing
because you’re trying to convince somebody
carbon dioxide is good for you.
Well, you may. You may convince a generation.
A whole generation was convinced
smoking tobacco is the best thing you could do.
If you’re a man you must smoke,
otherwise you’re not a man.
Yes or no?
A whole generation believed,
“If I don’t smoke and blow the smoke in your face,
I’m not man enough.”
But now suddenly,
it's become no good.
So this is what the marketing men will do.
They’re trying to sell something
that people may not need.
Instead of looking at someone as market,
if you look at them in human beings,
with some concern,
you would know what they need.
If you manufacture that,
you don’t have to market it,
they will stand in a queue
Sadhguru: I’m saying largely market-men will get eliminated.
Manufacturing and people –
in between little marketing.
Both you and me are manufacturing something that he wants.
But now I’m trying to tell him
what I’m manufacturing is really what you want,
not what this guy is doing.
Actually, that’s the truth
Sadhguru: Not that we are not using it,
we are using it in a very skewed way.
Sadhguru: Gossip gone global
Sadhguru: Because food looks prettier than the people who eat them
Simon Kemp: Slightly disconcerting concept again
Sadhguru: No, no,
if people are taking pictures of the food they eat and putting it on,
obviously they think it looks prettier than them
Sadhguru: See all this is happening
I mean, leave the jokes apart.
This is because
people are trying
Because now they found a means,
a technological means to find expression.
Expression more than perception means
marketing department is bigger than manufacturing.
That’s all that’s happening.
Sadhguru: Hmm? See,
what would perception look like?
See, there are only five instruments of perception right now for you
– seeing,
hearing,
smelling,
tasting,
touching.
So what you perceive through these five senses,
a certain process,
an amalgamated process of these five senses
Right now, you’re sitting here.
You’re seeing, you’re hearing,
I hope you’re not smelling anything
but actually it's all happening.
Smelling, sensations, heat, cold – all these things are happening.
You may not be conscious of it unless it becomes acute.
Simon Kemp: Right.
Sadhguru: Otherwise if you walk from there to there,
there are twenty-five different kind of smells –
minimum I’m saying –
but most of the time, you are not conscious of it
unless something becomes very pleasant or very unpleasant.
So every moment,
all the five senses are recording phenomenal amount of information.
Now, the process
the processing of this information is happening
from a certain prejudice.
When I say prejudice,
the identity causes prejudice.
If you are functioning from an identity,
whatever –
you are English,
I’m Indian, I’m
somebody’s man,
somebody’s woman –
this is all prejudice.
People think they’re broadminded.
Well, it's a broad prejudice
Yes.
The moment you’re identified with something,
there is a certain prejudice attached to it,
you can't help it.
That’s the way the intellect works
because intellect cannot function without identity.
If you take away identity,
your thoughts will become still.
That’s all it is.
That’s… It’s called meditation.
If you can sit here without being identified
with the physiological or psychological
or the worldly process that’s going on,
you will become meditative.
Because you’re not identified with anything,
your intellect becomes quiet.
As long as you’re identified,
do what you want, you cannot stop it.
It's like you’ve eaten bad food,
then you want to control the gas –
it won’t work
It’ll anyway happen.
So now you’re identified with something that you are not.
See,
you belonging to a certain nation,
you belonging to this or that is
something that we’ve made up, all right?
What we make up, we must manage.
But what we made up has gone out of control.
You identified to such a point you really think
it’s it – you’re willing to live and die for it.
So because of that identity,
what you call as my mind or intellect
has become prejudiced in a certain way.
From that prejudice, it's working.
It's okay for survival process.
This prejudice is good for survival process.
But if you’re wanting to look for clarity,
you want to see things the way they are,
you want to perceive life just the way it is,
not the way
not as an Englishman,
not as an Indian,
not as a man,
not as a woman,
but you want to experience life just the way it is,
then you must have the ability to distance yourself
from identity and just look at it.
It's not that you’re not at all doing it.
Every human being is becoming released from their identity
at some point of involvement with something, okay?
But it's not a conscious process,
it's not by choice.
Once in a way, it's happening.
Those moments, they produce something significant.
Rest of the time, they’re just a mess.
I’m talking about.
If you have a machine,
every time you touch it, it must fire, all right?
Intermittently it fires once in a way,
that’s not a great machine.
The same goes for the human being.
If you have a spark of genius,
you must be able to make it happen
spark all the time, twenty-four hours.
Otherwise it fires once in a way, accidentally,
then you become astrological.
You’re looking for the right position of the planets
for you to fire
That’s… That’s inefficiency.
That inefficiency is coming
because perception is blocked.
Sadhguru: Oh yes.
There’s an entire science.
As there is a science and technology to create external situations
the way we want it,
there is a whole science and technology
to create inner situation the way we… way you want it.
This is what we’re calling as Inner Engineering –
to engineer your interiority the way you want.
Sadhguru: See, this question is coming from a fundamental that you believe
that everything can be fixed intellectually.
Simon Kemp: Yes.
Sadhguru: No, it cannot be
As I said,
when I was speaking in the morning,
the other dimension of intelligence within you,
if you
I think today, people are beginning to talk about
emotional - what?
Emotional intelligence,
not just IQ, EQ and whatever.
–
This is just rudimentary steps
taking at least one small step but a rudimentary step.
This is essentially a
a very deep-rooted Western malaise
which has gotten into everybody today, across
because all of us are going through Western education.
We may be living in India
but our education is completely, unfortunately English
because ‘intellect is supreme’
this is a European idea.
In India, we have not given much significance to intellect
because your intellect always functions
from a limited data that you have gathered.
Your thought process happens only from the limited data that you have.
If you function from your thought process,
nothing new will ever happen in your life
because you’re just r… recycling the old,
all the time.
Maybe you can produce permutations and combinations of that.
Here,
our focus has always been
how to enhance your perception.
Don’t worry about your thought,
whether it looks smart or dumb, it… that’s not the issue.
How to enhance the perception?
If your ability to perceive life is enhanced,
naturally your ability to act in the world is naturally enhanced
without any effort.
Sadhguru: We can give you a simple,
a twelve-minute simple process of meditation.
It's available on the web.
We can give you a CD.
It's freely available.
Millions of people have practiced this –
very simple form.
If they do that and if it works,
they can do something more serious.
Simon Kemp: Twelve-minute.
Sadhguru: It's called Isha Kriya.
You just go on the net and say Isha Kriya,
it’ll come up.
There’s a phone app.
You can put it on your phone.
Simon Kemp: Phone app!
Sadhguru: Yoga is a technology for well-being, okay?
Simon Kemp: All right.
Sadhguru: Actually our tagline is ‘Inner Engineering,
Technologies for Well-being.’
You don’t need to believe it.
Why I’m insisting it's a technology is
it doesn’t matter who you are,
whether
what gods you believe in
or you disbelieve in,
which part of the geography you come from,
if you learn to use it, it works.
That’s the beauty of technology.
Here, if you learn to use it,
it works
and that’s the nature of yoga.
If you learn to use it, it’ll work for you.
It doesn’t matter who you are,
where you come from,
what you believe or disbelieve.
So these are technologies for well-being.
Making use of outs
external technologies to disseminate the same is a natural outcome.
It's a very natural thing to do.
So, for the first time in the history of humanity,
our ability to reach human beings on this planet is like never before.
The speed and the scope of it is unimaginable,
just twenty-five years ago or even ten years ago,
if you ask me.
But people tell me –
I don’t know if this is factually correct
but people tell me
sixty percent of the internet space is covered
by pornographic material.
I don’t know if I’m right on the figure
but people tell me so.
I think that’s a crime.
So I’m making an effort
technologies for inner well-being of the human being
must dominate the space
so that human beings learn how to be well,
that the tools for well-being
must be in the hands of every human being,
The tools for well-being must be in the hands of individual human beings,
not in the hands of organizations, gurus, popes,
no matter what.
I’m saying the tools for your well-being must be in your hands,
not in my hands.
Unfortunately, you left it in my hands,
I’m trying to see… put it into your hands.
So, please give us the digital support.
Simon Kemp: Gladly.
Sadhguru: …to make that happen.
Sadhguru: See, the basic issue is
do you want to look good, or feel good, or be good within yourself?
Simon Kemp: A lot of the Western world sees them as the
Sadhguru: It's about looking good.
Looking good is more important than what's happening within you.
Even if you’re a tortured human being within you,
you just have to look smart and nice and like that.
Simon Kemp: Mhmm
Sadhguru: This has to be taken away from an early childhood.
Looking good is not important.
What is your experience of life?
Is your experience of life great or not?
This is what is important.
This value change must happen.
It's not something that you can change overnight in the world
but those who suffer immensely will change.
I see that suffering coming
because suffering is getting younger and younger.
There was a time,
only old people used to be worried.
Now you see a twelve-year-old boy is seriously worried.
So when that kind of suffering comes,
looking good is not important.
When suffering becomes unbearable,
people will understand looking good is not important,
how I experience my life is important.
You hear this talk all over, isn't it, these days?
Still the necessary corrections have not been made
but people are beginning to talk.
So this is the time technologies for inner well-being are transmitted.
The time is right.
Tracey: I think that we are in a very unique moment in history of healthcare, at least in this
Sadhguru: That’s what every generation thinks. (Laughter)
Tracey: Well, let me give you some data points,
maybe I can convince you. (Laughs)
What I… what I mean by that is
even those of us who may really,
who are quite attached to the current medical model,
to re-look at that in a new way simply because it’s not working
and it’s not working in a lot of significant ways.
It’s not working financially,
I mean, the statistics and this audience probably knows them well.
The amount of money this country is spending in
hi-tech medical interventions exceeds any… by-far exceeds any other country around the globe
and yet our health outcomes are worse.
The….. Interesting now that I live in Veterans Administration and I interface quite a bit
with the department of Defense,
a statistics I was
I was in a meeting not very long ago and someone from the department of Defense said,
‘Do you know this? Health in this country is an issue of national security’
and I thought for a minute like,
‘What’s he talking about, right?’ (Sadhguru Laughs)
Because eighty percent of people that walk into a recruitment office
for the Armed Services
doesn’t even qualify to be considered for service,
eighty percent because of their health status
So the dominant medical paradigm is
what you were describing which is we have a disease that we have to fight.
And our… you… it’s revealed in the language that we use,
you know, antibiotics, anti-psychotics, anti… anti… anti
the concept - the disease, it’s over there
and the job of medicine is to fight that battle and win.
Sadhguru: See this… this whole concept and this approach to modern medicine
has come because
you need to understand when they thought of medicine
when they thought of developing some kind of medicine
and a system of medical treatment,
their problem was only with infectious diseases
and contagious diseases.
How to treat the plague?
How to treat the small pox?
How to treat this?
Nobody ever thought of a diabetes or a hypertension or a cardiac problem.
They never even considered those things
that did not exist in their radar.
In their radar, only infectious diseases did exist.
That has to be handled on a war footing,
no question about that because it is a war.
An infection means it’s an invasion from another organism
upon our own system and you have to use chemical weapons. (Laughter)
You can’t shoot them.
So this whole medical system
evolved from the need to handle infectious diseases,
contagious diseases which were taking a huge toll on populations in those times.
But today we have come to a place
where people are on self-help.
That is, they manufacture their own diseases, (Laughter)
they don’t wait for any infection to happen to them. (Laughs)
Because now they are on self-help,
they need another system of medicine,
another way to approach it completely
which is a shift we are struggling to make right now. (Laughs)
Tracey: And now where we are of course is that the sciences have advanced.
We have complexity theory and systems biology and quantum physics
but the medical model,
the dominant medical model
again I am making gross generalizations
but the dominant medical model is still designed,
our core competency is still designed
on the ‘find it - fix it’ approach
which is clearly failing.
I mean even in the chronic conditions in this country,
we’re not even holding our own.
I don’t know if you are aware of those statistics
but diabetes, hypertension, heart failure –
they are all… the percentage of our population,
obesity, the list goes on
every single one of them across the board and our veterans,
NNRs, civilian population are increasing every year.
So we are failing and I believe that
that uncoupling and removing the boundary shall we say
between medicine that has been over
held over here (Gestures)
and health and spirituality and whatever labels we want to put on this over here (Gestures),
you know
One response right now in this country is even with unaffordable
well, we have to focus more on health.
So one response is
‘well, medicine will keep doing disease management over here
and then we can pay little more attention and hopefully reimburse
a little more for health optimization over here.’
I personally think and then I want your thoughts on this:
If that is… that’s better than not including this
but the real opportunity is to remove the boundaries –
these are not separate things;
the mind and the body are not separate things.
And in… in western medicine,
we are taught to diagnose and treat the diseases of the body,
the diseases of the mind
but we have missed that the doorway to the health
and healing of the body and mind is really in my opinion,
the heart and the soul.
So how do we
how do we re-envision a future of healthcare where they aren’t those boundaries?
Sadhguru: See the ideal,
the ideal is one thing and what we can do today is a different thing, okay?
The ideal would be that we look at human well-being,
not human health.
If you consider human well-being as a composite subject
and an approach,
then you would consider what makes a human being complete
and approach all of them together –
that is the best way to do it.
But today what can we do?
If that’s a question,
we can only talk about, you know,
somewhere having a little
we can’t marry them yet,
we can only have a date. (Laughter)
Tracey: I kind of like to jump right in. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: It’s a… the situation is not ready to simply
get them together, no.
Because lot more work has to be done,
it’s not going to happen in a short span of time
but we can start interfacing here and there.
It is possible that hospitals can have a meditation center going within them
and it is possible meditations can….
meditation centers already generally have,
but we can make sure that there is a little bit of health center out there.
We can start having a little bit of a skirmish right now.
Right now, they are not ready for total union
because in both the sides,
there are too many opinions about each other.
Largely people are not looking at the whole health as… as such.
They are trying to impart what they have studied or what they have grasped.
It doesn’t matter whether it addresses the whole humanity
or the whole human being or not.
So that attitudinal change is not going to happen just like that.
Till a day comes
when medical education includes all these things
which may make it even longer than the way it is right now… (Laughs)
And I would like to see a day
when doctors before they touch another patient,
first fix themselves internally
before they touch somebody else
because this is all important.
When I say this is all important –
for example, we were talking about Bhuta Shuddhi
or handling the elements.
Today sufficient research has gone into particularly into water,
scientific research.
And what these scientists are saying is
‘water has memory.’
If you give it a thought, it remembers;
if you give it an emotion, it remembers;
if you give it a touch, it remembers.
So, if elements have that kind of memory outside, you can turn
you can change the quality of water just by touching it
or with a thought or an emotion or a hand.
There was a beautiful experiment conducted by
a twelve-year-old girl and ten-year-old boy in India.
What they did was,
they read about this somewhere on the internet and they came home
and they set up two glass pots of water.
One room… same water in two glass pots.
One room, they go and express very loving emotions,
they touch it, they kiss it, they hug it every day for ten minutes.
Another room, they go and abuse it and do
express all kinds of negativity.
Mother was very… their mother was very concerned,
‘I can’t believe they have so much negative emotion in them, (Laughter)
they are expressing it to the water.’
In ten days’ time,
this water for which they were abusing and expressing negative emotion, it turned dark.
The other water remained just like that.
They posted it on the YouTube, you must see it.
So, this is something we have always known.
In India, in part of our life,
nobody in traditional Indian home ever drinks water from a tap.
It doesn’t matter whether it’s potable or not potable.
Even if it is say… if it’s said potable, it is not.
What we do is, we take a copper vessel
or a… see, here otherwise always next to me,
there is a copper vessel or a brass vessel.
And they will take it, they will wash it with turmeric and tamarind and everything in the night,
put water in it;
they will apply something… some, you know, what is considered sacred symbols on it,
they worship this, and then only tomorrow morning,
it is given to your family.
Because water has memory.
They are saying if the water is pumped through the pipe, this
if pumped through the pipe and it’s taking fifty bends by the time it
it comes to your house
by the time it comes to your house, sixty percent of it,
the molecular change… change in it is such that it is literally turned into poison.
But if you take it in your glass and hold it for about twenty minutes,
it will undo itself
but just the forceful pumping, not contamination,
just the forceful pumping is making the water
in molecular structure in such a way
that it’s harmful to human health.
So if you’re doing that to the water,
if you are treating this with all kinds of emotions and negativities and,
you know,
all kinds of abuse to yourself and to others,
the water here also behaves the same way.
This is not new; always
every human being who lived on this planet with a certain connection
with nature around him always knew this.
So one of the things that we can do
particularly for people who are going to war and coming back whatever
war is the most extreme situation that human beings can create by themselves.
For other things, you need nature’s help, you know? (Laughs)
People who have been put through this wringer
if they are coming in broken states,
one of the best things you could do is,
all of them compulsorily should go through
at least one month of living on a farm being connected
to the soil and water and air around them
putting their bare hands into the land and doing something simple,
just being connected.
I must tell you this experience.
We had a yogic hospital in our yoga center in India.
We called it yogic hospital.
We did not want it to grow too much
because we don’t want to turn into a hospital fulltime;
we are a spiritual center. (Laughs)
So we’re keeping it low-key.
Once when I came here, I spoke and a few doctors
American doctors who were interested, they traveled to India.
They came and stayed there for three days and after three days,
one of the volunteers came and told me,
‘All the American doctors are up in arms.
They want to leave.’
I said, ‘What happened?’
They said, ‘It’s best that you meet them.
They’re just… off.’
Then I said, ‘Okay’ and I went to meet them.
Then I said, ‘What’s the problem?’
They said, ‘You said there is a hospital.
Where is the hospital?
There is no hospital here.’
I said, ‘Right now, there are about sixty and odd patients.’
They said, ‘Where is it?’
Their idea of a hospital is that there must be beds,
you must treat sick well and everybody should be
if you treat them so well, they will not want to become healthy. (Laughter)
‘Where are the patients?’
I said, ‘They’re all in the garden. I put them to work. (Laughter)
We give them the treatment and therapies and medication but rest of the time,
I put them to work.
Whatever they can do, they must do.
Above all, they must sit and work barefoot and bare hands in… with the soil.’
Just being in touch with the planet
because you are just a drop of this planet.
You are forgetting that.
What you call as my body is just a piece of the planet, isn’t it?
If you lose connection with the source,
will you not get disorganized?
There are specific scientific ways of doing that.
If you cannot do any of those things,
at least just let them walk in a farm barefoot,
work, do something,
you will see at least sixty-seventy percent of them will just come out of their problems
just like that, just being in touch with this.
Sadhguru: I thought marriage is a live-in relationship. (Laughter)
So (Laughs)
Isn't marriage a live-in relationship?
Are they living separately? (Laughter)
There are some marriages like that,
I know, but… (Laughter)
First of all,
we must understand why are we forming a relationship?
Right now,
this
In your language,
the West has seeped in too strongly in your language
because in… somewhere in your mind if you utter the word ‘relationship,’
you're only thinking about sex-based relationships
that’s not how it's been in this country.
When we say ‘relationships’ in this country,
we thought we have a relationship with our parents,
our friends, our brothers, our sisters
all kinds of relationships.
But if you go in the West and you say ‘a relationship’
it means body-based relationship.
First, drop that idea
relationships can be on many different levels, isn't it?
Why are we making only one particular relationship so important against the other?
Yes,
it is also an important relationship, but not against the other, isn't it?
But right now, slowly we are building this Western ideology that this relationship versus the rest
it need not be so.
The reason why in this country, you know,
marriages have been very stable,
not always because two people were getting along great,
not always.
Because, when they got married
a few thousand people got married along with them;
bride and the groom were a small aspect of the marriage (Laughs),
there were so many other people involved.
Now, if you have to break it, you have to break it on all levels, you can't break it.
You know, your father and his father or your father and her father may be having such a wonderful friendship,
you can't break it now.
Even if you want to break it with your wife, you can't break it
because the whole family has joined up in so many ways,
it's not just about two people.
Is this good or bad?
See, in the course of living together, people…,
today you got into some kind of situation in the evening,
today you thought, ‘This is it, I don’t want to see your face again - finished.’
But tomorrow morning you're again in love.
Hasn’t this happened to you any number of times?
Yes?
If there is a whole lot of people around you,
when that evening when that feeling came,
‘That I don’t want to see your face again,’
at that moment if you pack up and leave, it's finished;
you can't come back tomorrow morning.
But now there's a whole lot of situation that you can't leave, you stayed on,
tomorrow morning everything is wonderful.
Unfortunately most human beings are still like this, isn't it?
They can't be so aware and every day, they can manage everything beautifully
that’s not how it's going, life. Isn’t it so?
Ugly things happen, isn't it, in beautiful relationships?
Don’t they happen?
Even in most beautiful relationships
ugly incidents are happening. Isn't it so?
To sustain those moments of ugliness,
you need some support system.
If there was… just two idiots are there, they’ll break. (Laughs)
So, once children come it gets little more difficult,
but before that all the others are important. (Laughs)
So, what is this new thing about living
live-in and marriage?
So, what you are saying is,
‘I’ll walk out whenever I feel like it,’ isn't it?
That’s not good for anybody.
This is a huge load on human consciousness
there is no emotional security.
I think United States of America… Just recently
I was addressing a group of people just a week ago
and I was telling them one big reason
They were talking about the economic meltdown,
‘Why are we not productive?
Why is it that this has happened?’
I said, ‘One important thing is there's no emotional security for the man and the woman.
You go out, when you come back you don’t know whether your home will be there or not.
You don’t know whether your wife will be waiting for you or not’
this is there on most people’s minds; at least fifty percent of the people’s minds.
With this level of insecurity,
your husband goes to the office,
you don’t know whether he’ll come back or go away with the secretary.
When this emotional insecurity is there,
you cannot focus on anything.
People cannot be productive when there is no stable emotional situation for themselves.
Here, we fixed the marriage in such a way,
no matter what happens, you can't break this.
It doesn’t matter what stupid things you do,
you still have to come back to that place
that gives a certain sense of security.
There may be lot of ugliness in the situation
but still there is a stability where you can focus on what you're doing.
so when you say marriage versus live-in, what is it?
Uncommitedly you want to live in, that’s all, isn't it?
You don’t want to live in a committed way.
I don’t think living in a uncommitted way together is a good thing
nor is there any… I'm
I'm not saying marriage means some pujari (priest) has to come and say a mantra for you,
but it must be a committed relationship.
If there's no commitment,
there's no real sense of respect.
When there's intimacy, there must also be respect for the other person’s body, mind and everything, isn't it?
When you say, ‘I'm not committed to you,
whenever I feel like it I’ll walk out’
there is no sense of value and respect for the other person, isn't it?
So, marriage is not some fairytale thing happening
nor is it happening in heaven,
it is just a statement of commitment that, ‘I'm with you,’ isn't it?
If you're against commitment,
no,
I don’t think that’s a good thing to do.
It will not bring the stability that you're seeking out of that relationship.
If you're just looking for pleasure,
it's up to you,
but if you're looking for a stable situation it takes commitment.
Without commitment there is no stable situation.
So, marriage is not performed by somebody
that is only for social reasons.
Marriage is between two people that there is a sense of commitment,
‘I'm with you’, isn't it?
Whether we actually go through a ceremony
or do not go through a ceremony could be a choice,
but I don’t think there's a choice about
whether we are committed to each other or not,
then you will never know the joy of being together;
it'll always be a calculation, isn't it?
It'll always be a calculation, isn't it,
‘What can I get out of you,
what can you…’
Once there is ‘What can I get out of you?’
a relationship cannot be beautiful.
Sadhguru: So,
‘How did I ever marry you?’
I think lot of them are asking that question. (Laughter)
So if somebody is asking that question you must look at yourself,
what's happening with you.
Somebody is wondering after many years,
‘How did I ever marry you,’
you really need to look at yourself
not previous lives,
this life how you are living. (Laughter)
So if any of you,
somebody wonders,
‘How did I ever marry you,’
don’t think of previous lives,
you have to see how you are living this life.
It's very important. (Laughs)
So, I think this is all Bombay talkies problem
Janam janam mei… (Part of a few Hindi songs meaning many births)
whatever. (Laughter)
I think in the new movies it's all gone, isn't it? (Laughter)
You… you grew up on 70s, 80s movies
so all janam janam business. (Laughter)
See all the young people on the new movies, okay? (Laughter)
They are no more janam janam business. (Laughter)
They are all thinking of relationships,
expiry date and… (Laughter &amp; Applause)
So… (Laughs)
So, if your pursuit for truth is guided by commercial cinema,
hmm,
then (Laughs)
you are asking for trouble, you know. (Laughs)
So, if the only way you can hold on to somebody
is by believing for many lifetimes we have been stuck together,
it's a horrible way to live together. (Laughter) (Laughs)
No?
‘No, I am with you,
because I have been here for many lifetime with you’
is a horrible way to be together, isn't it?
I am with you now because I want to be with you;
this is a beautiful way to be with somebody, isn't it?
‘I am with you because you know last three lifetimes…’ (Laughter) -
don’t create such horrors in your life, please.
So, you have been together for three lifetimes means it's time to part. (Laughter)
No?
People keep on coming to me;
they put me through these works all the time,
‘Sadhguru, was I with you last lifetime?’ (Laughter)
What ever makes you think if I had seen you in the last lifetime
I would ever come in front of you once again? (Laughter)
What happened…,
I am telling you what happened yesterday is of no consequence.
Now you are trying to create a consequence of what happened,
might have happened.
You do not even know,
what might have happened
another life.
This is like, you know,
almost everybody talks about their school life or student life like,
‘Oh, they were the golden years of my life.’
We know what the golden years were.
When you were there you were tensed,
you were shit scared of your exams,
you hated your teachers
and you didn’t want to go to school -
they were the golden years now because they are over. (Laughter)
Because you don’t have to go to school anymore they are golden.
I think you will feel that way about your marriage also after… (Laughter)
If you feel that way after your marriage after it is over, it’s no good.
If you feel that way when it's on that’s great, isn't it?
After it's over you feel
‘Oh, it was so wonderful, but…’ (Laughter) you know, that’s no good.
If you are feeling that way when it's on, that’s great.
So, don’t waste your time digging into the past.
I am telling you this damn memory is crippling you.
It is not allowing you to use your mind as an instrument of penetration,
as an instrument to open up dimensions of life.
Now you… (Laughs)
you want to pick up the whole backlog that other people have forgotten
and that’s the only way you can relate to your husband or wife -
what a pathetic way to relate to people!
Don’t do that.
See if you can find some value in the human being who is sitting in front of you
for what he or she is now;
not for what they were somewhere.
The whole
the whole aspect of modern society today is
we don’t value you for who your father was,
we value you for who you are.
Hmm?
you are valued for who are, that’s significant, isn't it?
‘Oh you oh, because oh,
whose son are you,
whose daughter are you?’
That’s not important.
Unfortunately most people are still living in that.
Who you are is important, isn't it?
Yes?
What you have made out of yourself now is important.
Who your father was is not important,
that’s the big shift we have made
from feudalistic way of living
to whatever we call as modern society.
Little chaotic we are, but it's quite a significant step, isn't it?
Isn’t it so?
It’s a quite a significant step
that nobody asks me who your father is;
they are only looking at who I am.
Isn't it a very big step?
But if you came here 50 years ago or 100 years ago
nobody would look at your face and ask who you are,
they would only ask who your father is.
Yes?
That’s changed
significantly changed,
So, what were you in your previous life is worse than asking
who your father is. (Laughs)
What are you right now
that’s what is most important, isn't it?
What have you made out of your life right now
that is the most significant thing.
So, don’t waste your time and life digging into something.
of all the things in the World
Of All the things that a human being Can, do
Why Yoga!
Everything That Human beings can do Is
Essentially an Expression [of] who They are
Somebody Sings a song Somebody dances Somebody writes A book Somebody Paints a picture
Whatever Else We do
[It'S] an Expression of who you are
You May be Conscious [of] it you may be Unconscious of it
But Still everything that you Say everything that you, do
Everything
[That] Comes out of Here
Is Essentially an Expression of who you are
So yoga in that way Is?
Diametrically Opposite to This
Because it's not an Expression of who you [are]
It's about Determining as to who you are it's About Determining as to what you want to be?
Changing The very Fundamentals of One's Existence
Today There is Substantial
Medical and Scientific
Evidence
[to] Show that
The very Fundamentals of The Activity of [your] Brain
your Chemistry
Even Your Genetic Content can be Changed by practicing Different systems of Yoga
This Needed no Confirmation Because
We've Always witnessed This?
But Today There is Scientific Data to prove This
So this Is not an Expression of who you are this is About Determining the Nature [of] you wish to who you wish to be
Changing The Fundamental ingredients which has Made you, who you are
[To] Yoga as a system
Needs
Much more Involvement
Than Any other Things That One
Any other other Forms of Things that we do?
Which Are Merely an Expression of who, we are?
If you find Full Expression
Through Any Particular Activity
It may also leave you somewhat Transformed
If You Cook with all your heart
Sometimes When it May Happen
yes
Taking Care of A cow Can Change your life you know
If you sing With all your heart Sometimes Permission May happen if You, dance With all your heart some Transformation May Happen
But that is only A?
Certain Impact
That is Happening Because of Absolutely Involvement?
In A particular Activity
But Essentially That Activity by Nature IS an Expression of who you are it Is not, Determining the Nature of who you are
So when we transform our Activity?
Not as an Expression of who, we are
Because who wants to find Expression like This in the Morning
Definitely not isn't it
So it Is not an Expression
It is [a] method it is a means it's a technology Through which you Can Change the Shape of who you are
Literally, also Otherwise, also
You Can Change the very Shape of who you?
Really Are right now That [Can] be Transformed because who, you are real right Now as a Person
Is a combination of Things
Genetic Material
Before that The Karmic Substance that you carry
Because of That Use chose at Certain, Home so the genetic material and
Since The moment you [are] Born Whatever Kind of Impressions that have gone Into you in the Form of Variety of
Experiences
Situations Thoughts Emotions
Relationships Associations
Whatever Else You have imbibed all These things Make you a Certain kind of Person
When you say I am a Certain kind of Person what you're Saying is I have this kind of Compulsions?
When you say I'm This kind of Person what you are Saying Is this is the kind of Compulsions that I identify Myself With
So I am this kind of a Person
People you know it's A very Western Thing but it's very Much There in India Today
Get A lot of Indians it far more Western Than West
And if You go all [the] way west you come back to India so they're much more Western Than westerners are Today?
So People Say I'm a morning Person [I] am I even in Person
So what the mean Is?
Morning [I] cannot Wake Up in the Morning that Means I'm A evening Person [I] can't stay awake in The evening
So I'm a morning Person
Not only That People
It's going far I know some more [Blackberry] People some are apple People
So getting World is getting Divided in so Many Ways
They're Not Just instruments that you Use and Keep it Down it's you get Identified With it
So there Are [Chapati] People There are [rhys] People There are Those Are People They're [Idli] People you know all kinds
so
What Kind you are is Essentially a Certain type of Compulsions?
So you sit Yourself Into the Process of Yoga because you, don't want to be this kind, [or] that kind
That you will be the kind that you're Required to be in A particular moment
If it's Morning you're a morning Person is evening Evening your Own evening Person
If You're not Required to be a Person you are not a Person that
Is you become Flexible?
This Flexibility, We start Working With your Body to start With
Afterwards it Should Come to Every Aspect of your life
your Physical Structure
your psychological Structure your emotional Structure
your Karmic Structure
Everything Should Become Flexible
That it can be Whatever it is required to be it Is [not] Stuck being This way, or that Way?
So yoga as a Process Yoga as a method Yoga as [a] technology Yoga as a science is Essentially
To Break the Limitations of A
Certain Concretization
That Happens
Which We Call as Personality?
To evolve From Being a Person to a Presence
If you're a Person
[That] Means you have Made a Shell out of Yourself you form the Shell Within that Shell only you Can Operate?
If You Break the Shell you [will] no more be a Person but Simply a presence as
Life Is as
God Is Just a presence
If it can be encased in A Shell it becomes a person
So yoga means
Slowly You're Working on making The Shell Thinner and Thinner More and more Porous that
One day you can exist Without a shell
So Essentially in your Experience [Yoga] Means Morning
Where the southerner the way it is Is?
All Aspects of Physicality Or cyclical in the Universe
Planets Are Going Around the sun There's all our System [of] Moving Everything [in] The Galaxy in the Cosmos is cyclic, [oh]?
The More and more you are identified With your physical System the more and More Cyclically you are, also
your Experience is A cyclic [o]
The Process of Life Is cyclic, [oh] if you Watch Carefully Enough even The Situations that you face in your life Come in Cycles
So yoga, means on One Level
To Break the Cycle of life [what] is a circle right now, We want to open it Up and Make it a straight line
Because if You are Going in Circles if I say, you're Going in Circles what does it mean to you you're not going Anywhere
It just gives you an Impression that you're going Somewhere but. You're Not, Really going Anywhere you're Going Through the Same Thing again [and] again
So yoga!
Means to Open up the Circle and Stretch it out like A straight line that if You follow the line You go Somewhere
You're not Going Round and round
Nature Is not going to release you
so Simply you
Have to Work at it and Work at it and Work at it
Otherwise You Must be Happy doing the circle A
Circle, also Can Be described as A circus
If You become Conscious if the whole Thing looks like a circus
If You are not Conscious you Can only See Three feet in Front of you then it's all real
If you Can See the whole Circle of your life?
Suddenly it Becomes Like A circus Once You realize his circus you, don't want to go Through the circus again again
Only if your Vision Is too limited you can See only Three feet in Front of you
Everything is real for you
If you Open [Up] and See the whole circle the way, you're going it Looks Like A circus and Definitely you
Don't want it to Continue Forever [you] want to do something [about] it
so these Cycles These repetitive Cycles of
Compulsiveness
Is coming because There are Various types of Memories in the System?
Memories
Karmic Memories
Information Essentially Means Memory isn't it it is the Foundations of Information that
We carry Which is Constructed this Body the way it Is?
To live in it and not to be off it
Will not come Easy I'm not Saying it's difficult but it Needs to be Worked at
The Sodden Eyes Just About This However Simple the Sadhana [Is]
Every day if it is worked out
Slowly One Can See a Certain Level of Freedom
Happening Within you step by [step]
Maybe inch by inch
Maybe Micro Millimeter by a Micro Millimeter but
Nobody Can Say it is not Releasing you it will slowly Release you
If You want to go rapidly A lot more to do you, don't mind going slowly something to do
you
Sadhguru: Have you noticed many times if you’re in a hotel lobby,
there is a background music going on and after sometime
you do not know that there is music going on?
Unless you want to make a conversation and you find it interferes with it
or something like that
otherwise it’s on all the time and you do not notice it.
Being in America, some machine is buzzing all the time in your house,
but you do not know that it’s buzzing.
Only when you enter the house you will know it, after some time you do not know it.
So almost anything which is there with you all the time,
you tend to not know it.
That's the only reason why you do not know the hand of the Divine upon you,
because it's always on.
If it was off and on,
if
You do not even know that your breath is on.
If it goes off for a minute, for sure you know. (Laughs)
So because it's not at all off, that's the reason why you do not know.
But what is the problem if something is on all the time,
what is the problem not knowing?
Not knowing that you’re alive, what is the problem?
You will just miss life, that's all.
The joy of being in grace will be lost.
Still life will be happening,
but the joy of being in grace is completely lost upon you.
So it is not something that's on and off.
It is not something that every weekend you question whether it is on or off.
It's just on.
You just have to, you know,
become conscious of it so that you know the joy of being in grace.
I have said this in many ways,
but people… I am sure most of you have chosen to ignore it.
I have said,
“Once you sit with me even for a moment,
then there is no such thing as privacy in your life.”
So the moment you sat with me,
particularly initiated by me,
after that there is no such thing as whether it is on or not –
it is on all the time.
It is just that you are expecting grace just to fulfill your plans.
Most people are only expecting grace to fulfill their plans,
because this is the old habit of going to the temple, church or mosque
and telling God what he must do. (Laughs)
If he does not do, you will change your God.
So this is the old habit.
So, grace is not about fulfilling your plan.
Grace is about fulfilling life's plan for you.
This is not about fulfilling your petty plan,
because every day your plans keep changing.
At different stages in your life,
many, many times you thought “this is it”
and next moment you changed your decision.
So grace, a Guru's grace is not designed to fulfill your plans.
Guru's grace is designed to fulfill the life's plan.
You as a piece of life, to fulfill its plan,
to make life arrive at its fulfillment,
not to fulfill your immediate plan.
You want to go on a vacation,
“Sadhguru, why are you not helping me?”
This is not about that. (Laughs)
So don't every other day keep on questioning,
“Is it there with me? Is it not there with me?”
I wouldn't be wasting my life with you
if I could not sustain the support and make it happen.
TarunTahiliani: When we talk about being this great society and
granted we were colonized and all,
what is this great society or culture
when we are so willing and with such alacrity we embrace the West,
we embrace what our colonizers left behind.
We judge our own if they don’t match up to this.
When they don’t feel comfortable enough,
I mean when I speak to people and I say,
“Aap Hindi me kyunnahebaatkarteho?” “Nahi Sir, agar hum English me baatnahikarenge to we have no meaning.”
I have this constant argument in the factory.
I have it when I am trying to interview people,
I say “Speak in Hindi.”
If they speak in Hindi, they want to sit on the floor.
Only if they speak in English, do they think they are good enough to sit.
Our whole notion of equality has become a language-based
Perhaps it’s less so in the south.
So, perhaps you can help me resolve this constant confusion I have
in terms of, we as a culture why have we done this to ourselves?
Sadhguru: We need to understand the difference between conquest and colonization.
Conquest is to beat somebody down and sit on top of their heads.
Colonization is to convert people into your way,
so that they will serve you without thinking they are serving you.
So, some of the things, which were the strengths of the nation were clearly mocked out by the British.
You must see the letters that McCauley wrote to the parliament.
So, he said
“There are three things which makes India to be a place
which is impossible to be conquered.
One thing is its education system,
another thing is its spiritual process,
another thing is its family and cultural strength.
If we don’t weaken these three things, we will never conquer
wherever they went, they had absolute success, hundred percent success.
You go to Australia (Laughs), it is another England, okay?
The native cultures of those lands are only archival,
only in the museums they live.
In many parts of Africa, South America, North America,
everywhere they have absolute success.
The only place where they
did not succeed though you and me are speaking English language today
they did not succeed entirely here,
because one thing is the spiritual process was so strong,
the ethos of spirituality
The only way you could take away the Hindu way of life,
which was not a religion per se,
it was a certain a millionfold
a million doorway palace of spiritual process,
not one kind of process,
not one kind of belief.
The only way you could kill this was to kill every human being that lived in this country,
because there was no one papacy,
one focused place where all the knowledge is centered.
It’s just happening decentralized,
completely decentralized.
So, it’s because of this you still have some India left.
That’s the only reason.
Otherwise, in three hundred
two hundred and fifty to three hundred years’ time is a long enough time
to subjugate people and change everything about them.
It’s a matter of eight to nine… eight to ten generations of people.
Everything can be wiped out in ten generations.
The only and only place where they have not succeeded is India
though you became a little bit of a sahib.
TarunTahiliani: Too much sir, regretfully
Sadhguru: You are falling back
Tarun Tahiliani: Not I am falling back.
We have to bring on this round
although I do think now
and I complain to the magazines and all,
which are again owned by companies in the UK
that now there is a cultural imperialism coming.
I said you all stretch women on computers.
You make beautiful Indian woman feel inadequate
and because your advertisers are these brands –
“What are you people doing?
You are still stuck with that imperialism from the West.”
I know it’s maybe
I also wonder how because if the elite did not, the people who are privileged
did not withhold the values,
it stands to reason then that other people want to follow though
I totally agree with you in what you said.
Sadhguru: What the sword and the gun could not do,
MTV is doing it.
TarunTahiliani: Well, there you go.
Sadhguru: Culture is always an evolving and exchanging process.
You cannot isolate a culture and say this is my culture
and try to preserve it.
Any culture that needs to be preserved means it’s already become archival.
A culture is an evolving, pulsing, growing thing.
So, we don’t have to be afraid of other influences,
if only people consciously pick up what they want.
Right now, they’re compulsively picking up things
TarunTahiliani: Absolutely
Sadhguru: …whatever is thrown at them because they think it’s superior.
That has to go.
I think that will only go when there is a large scale economic well-being in this country.
economic well-being means first thing is they give up all Indian weave and Indian texture
and everybody goes to America’s workmen’s clothes.
That is the sign of prosperity.
If… if everybody wears worn out clothes in America,
everybody wears worn out clothes here.
Somebody tears their pant there, everybody tears their pant here.
So, this is because of the economic superiority.
Till we become economically capable and competent where we feel fine with the way we are,
till then we will tend to imitate somebody else.
So, if we want to save the culture, which most people think
would not think like this,
but I am telling you if you want to save this culture,
if you want to have Indian culture growing and throbbing,
we must achieve a quick economic well-being for maximum number of people in this country.
When that happens,
you will see the need to imitate will go away.
Then we will choose something from the West,
something from the East,
something from the South,
something from the North, it’s okay.
TarunTahiliani: I also always wondered about this divide with this English-speaking culture in this country and the vernacular.
The vernacular kept its culture more,
which as you say now is also subject to the same influences as the West.
Unfortunately, what’s happened in India
because the elite were more English speaking,
everybody else wanted to follow their path.
I think when you see people who come from the villages as we all have seen,
they come in a certain way,
but today when you see their children who are grown up,
say in Bombay and Delhi,
even if they are in the slums, when you see people
kids coming out the slums, you can’t tell,
because they are all dressing in western culture.
They wear the torn jeans, they wear this, they wear something
so there is also a homogeneity coming into our society
How would you see this change, I mean where is our society heading?
Sadhguru: There are many layers of India, not one or two.
There are multiple layers of India.
So, you cannot say where the society is heading
because every society is - some are heading to Phuket,
some are thinking of coming to Delhi,
some are thinking of coming to Mumbai,
some just want to get out of the slum.
There are many societies out here.
The question is about where are we taking the nation,
because always we have been a diverse culture
and this diversity,
we have managed very well mainly
because of the fundamental spiritual ethos
where we always saw that whoever and whatever you may be is your making.
It’s your karma means it’s your making.
TarunTahiliani: Do you subscribe to that?
Sadhguru: What?
TarunTahiliani: I mean this is the prevalent thought so far that it’s your karma.
I mean I don’t think that that’s my karma.
I have been brought up that way, do you subscribe to that?
Sadhguru: No, no. When I say karma, I want you to understand –
it’s my making.
Whatever I am in my life is my making.
It’s a most dynamic way to exist.
Slowly this most dynamic way to exist has been kind of corrupted
to become a fatalistic existence
TarunTahiliani: Yes, exactly
Sadhguru: …but if I told you this is God’s will that you are doing well,
then you have no choice.
If I tell somebody who is not doing well “This is God’s will”,
he has simply no choice, isn’t it?
That’s the way he has to be.
When I say “It’s your making”, that means he can make it something else if he wishes.
It is just that it has been wrongly put as if it’s the end of the world.
When we said it’s your karma,
we are saying it is one hundred percent your making,
everything that you are and that means you have to create your own life.
So, because of this,
it is not that it’s fully misunderstood.
It’s partially conveniently misunderstood to a point,
but still this has kept people free of resentment and anger and hatred.
That’s why India is incapable of a revolution, you know.
TarunTahiliani: So far at least, yes. I would agree.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Once you lose this spiritual ethos, if all this,
even the terminology disappears from day-to-day culture which is happening.
I don’t think today’s generation is even using the word karma anymore.
So, once this disappears, then resentment will grow in people.
Resentment and anger can lead to a revolution.
A revolution can sometimes lead to well-being,
but it usually… it only replaces one tyrant with another set of tyrants.
Usually that’s what it’s done in the past.
and many people today in the political sphere are talking
in terms of anger being the only propelling force for change.
We have never seen it that way in this nation.
For thousands of years, we have been here.
We always saw anger is not the way to propel change.
You can do it out of shear human longing to be better.
Every human being is constantly longing to be little better than what he is right now.
Just that longing is enough to transform a society and individual and the whole situation.
If… if only you create the situation where everybody has the opportunity
to find expression to that longing
It is not necessary you have to if any major change has to happen
It has to happen with anger, brutality, and blood,
you know, people have gone to the extent of saying
only blood moves the wheels of history.
No, it need not be.
It can be just human love, human compassion, human ingenuity, human intelligence
can truly move the wheels of history
and that is the modern times.
Now, the information technology and other things is a clear manifestation
that human ingenuity can change the world.
It need not necessarily happen with blood and gore.
Our lives have changed so dramatically in our own lifespan.
How we were experiencing life twenty five years ago
and how we are experiencing life today,
it’s… it’s an unbelievable change
TarunTahiliani: So to go back to what I was asking you about what is
what defines the spiritual space that made this Hindustan
that people recognize and that has held us, if you could elaborate on that?
Sadhguru: This is a godless country,
Tell me, who is the god in this country?
TarunTahiliani: It’s… there are millions of different people,
you said thirty six million or something.
Sadhguru: Yeah.
So, those millions of gods happened when our population was that much.
Since
TarunTahiliani: Each one had their own.
Sadhguru: Yeah. Because
TarunTahiliani: So, it is up to 1.3 billion gods now.
Sadhguru: No, we lost our imagination somewhere on the way.
We became shy of creating gods
because other people laughed at us
“Oh, you have so many gods.”
This is again inferiority complex.
This idea that there is one god sitting up there,
one big human being, of course a man not the… not a woman (Laughs),
sitting up there and controlling the whole universe and whatever,
and this has all come because
they think the existence is human centric.
We have never seen it that way.
We know we are just a small speck in the universe,
and tomorrow morning, if we disappear,
everything will be fine.
Nothing is going to go wrong.
TarunTahiliani: Absolutely. (Laughs)
Sadhguru: So, this is something that we have always understood.
The only reason why we are talking about a God is
because we have no explanation for the creation.
There is such a phenomenal creation
and we don’t know how.
So, simple childish explanation is there is one man sitting up there
and doing all this stuff.
The idea of God has entered our mind
only because we are unwilling to admit that we do not know
how all this happened.
Because it’s too phenomenal, too magical –
the creation the way it is,
who did it means there must be somebody up there.
If there was no creation, you would have definitely not thought of a creator, isn’t it?
Because the nature of your mind is logical –
for everything if there is a A, there has to be a B.
This is how the logical mind thinks.
So, there is a creation, so there must be a creator.
This is rudimentary logic, this is childish logic which has led to all this.
So, we created gods and whatever else.
In India, we never believed in a god.
here in this country we are referring to the gods or the deities or yantras.
Yantra means a machine –
a machine that we created for our well-being.
We clearly know we created it.
Everywhere else God created man.
In this country, man created God and we are very conscious about it.
Everywhere else also it’s the same truth.
They have lost the awareness about it.
Now, in competition with ignorance, we are also losing it.
This is not a land which was created by morality.
We are a completely amoral country.
Please see this,
and it is the most beautiful way to live
because morality means persecution,
morality means right and wrong.
Once we come to right and wrong, tell me who is right, who is wrong?
Always it’s me who is right and you who is wrong.
Sadhguru: So, once right and wrong comes, you will create a very prejudiced world.
So, we never looked at it right and wrong.
We always saw it in terms of every life has to find full expression.
So, for that it needs nurture.
How well you nurture it, that’s how well it becomes.
Like every plant, like every animal, a human being also needs nurture
and he needs external nurture and also self-nurture.
Both are needed.
So, every life on this planet,
how great it becomes or how puny it becomes is not dependent upon
whether it’s good or bad.
It is dependent upon how much nurture it finds from outside and from within.
So because we recognize this,
no good and bad was fixed.
No right and wrong was fixed.
No high and low was fixed.
Everything was left open.
people you know like… travelers
like twelve hundred-fourteen hundred years ago writing or
some people who came in the BC time
over two thousand years ago, they’re writing
“There is no… nobody to rob anything from you,
no murderers, no killers, no thieves.”
We can’t say much about that today (Laughs),
but still our level of crime is way below anything else on the planet.
People don’t understand this,
people think there is too much crime happening in this country
no.
For example, twelve kilometers away from the ashram,
there is a police station which has eleven policemen allotted to it.
One… in that, one is a sub-inspector.
Ten policemen –
out of that three will always be on leave.
So, seven - out of those seven,
two will be on night duty.
Only five left.
There is no vehicle.
They only have a bicycle –
some of them have their own private TVS moped
for which the government doesn’t give gas.
So, if you call them and say there has been a murder,
he will say, “Should I really come?
Anyway the man is dead. (Laughter)
Call the ambulance. What will I do?”
I am saying that is the level of law or there is literally no law, okay?
But still there is no great amount of crime.
People are in such desperate conditions economically.
Some people are living up here,
some people living here,
nobody slits anybody’s throat.
This is spirituality.
TarunTahiliani: I have always wondered and I agree with you.
Sadhguru: So, I am saying it is not controlled by law.
It is controlled by people’s way of being.
Ugly incidents, aberrations happen - yes,
we have to enforce law in those places.
That is a necessity.
But we need to appreciate,
without any law how we are,
with the levels of disparity that is there in the society,
how we still are, this wouldn’t be possible anywhere else.
If you’re (you?) take away law in New York City for three days, you had it. (Laughs)
[Questioner] If we want to succeed in our life
which will play a major role Guruji -
fate, God, effort or luck?
[Sadhguru] Or winning a election? (Laughter)
[Questioner] If we want to win in election, that our luck is also important.
[Sadhguru] Fate, God, luck, effort –
maybe all of them, (laughs)
but in what proportion?
So when you say fate,
obviously it’s something that you cannot do anything about.
When you say luck,
again obviously it’s something that you cannot do anything about.
When you say God,
again it’s something that you cannot do anything about.
So only thing that’s in your hands is effort.
So put your 100% into your effort,
what happens happens, isn’t it? (Laughs)
(Applause)
So don’t leave proportions of your energy and your capability
to luck¸ God, fate, all these things;
that’s not your business.
If there is such a thing, it will act.
Your business is only effort, isn’t it?
Just do that.
Effort
has to be incisive,
in the sense,
it should be focused,
calibrated.
Simply if you make effort,
it’s foolish effort, isn’t it?
Just labor is not going to get you somewhere,
right kind of action,
the right timing,
right place,
all this is important, isn’t it?
So
for all these things to happen,
you need perception and intelligence.
So that's all you must do in your life
constantly looking for ways
to enhance your perception and your intelligence;
rest will anyway happen.
This is one thing that unfortunately humanity is not doing.
They’re trying to become capable of something.
Do not try to become capable of something,
just enhance your perception and intelligence,
whatever comes your way...
Right now, let us say it’s like this, you know,
this is happening in the world all the time.
Everybody wants to become a doctor.
Not now,
25 years ago it was so.
If you want to study means first thing is medicine.
If you don’t get a seat,
what’s next?
Engineering.
Don’t get a seat, what?
Next thing, next thing, like this.
So let’s say
you became a doctor
and let us say everybody came to the yoga program
and they stopped going to a doctor.
At least your visits to the doctor has come down, isn’t it?
Has it?
Has it come down or no?
[Audience] Yes.
For sure it’s come down.
So business will go down.
It will no more be a good profession to go into
because very few doctors are becoming doctors
because they want to become doctors,
others are becoming doctors because they think it’s lucrative, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
Most people are becoming doctors because
they think somebody’'s sickness is a lucrative business. (Laughs)
It’s a very
I don’t want to go into other aspects,
it's quite disturbing for me (Laughs)
There are a few doctors who really want to be that,
they want to understand the human system
and they want to serve in that direction,
that's great.
Suppose everybody became healthy –
you don’t want that, isn’t it?
Yes, you don’t want that. (Laughs)
So do not try to put up a recipe for your success.
Success is only when
you’re able to use yourself to your full potential.
It doesn’t matter
whether you become a doctor or a politician
or a yogi or what the hell you become is not the thing.
Success means
you are living your life to your full potential,
that’s what success means.
If that has to happen,
you need perception and an active intelligence.
‘How do I grow my intelligence?’
Don’t worry about that.
Right now the important thing is to enhance your perception.
If you’re able to see life just the way it is,
you have the necessary intelligence to conduct it well.
If you’re not able to see life the way it is,
your intelligence will work against you.
Most intelligent people on this planet
are generally the most miserable people on the planet.
This is simply because
they have an active intelligence but no perception of life.
So
one thing,
one most important thing that people have not worked at,
is to enhance their perception.
They’re trying to broaden their mind – that’s not the point;
that will only make you socially successful,
not truly successful.
If you want to be truly successful,
you must be able to see everything just the way it is,
without distortions.
If you can see everything just the way it is,
life becomes a play,
you can play it joyfully,
you can play it well for sure.
If you can play it well
people will say you’re successful.
You should never think
‘I want to be successful.’
Don’t ever think ‘I want to be successful.’
Just see how to make this being into a full-fledged being.
People will say one day,
‘Oh, he is successful, he i’s a great success.’
You should not be aspiring for success;
it’'s a miserable way to structure your life.
You will simply cause pain and suffering to yourself
and suffering to everybody
because your idea of success is sitting on top of somebody’s head, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Your idea of success is right now
everybody should be below you,
you must be on the top –
this is your idea of success.
This is not success,
this is sickness.
So do not ever think of success.
Just see how to make this into a full-fledged being,
this will find expression.
If it finds good expression,
people around you will say, ‘Oh, he is a great success!’
That’s fine.
People should recognize you’re a success.
You should not be thinking how to be successful –
very wrong way to approach life.
(Sadhguru): So you set yourself into the process of yoga
because you don’t want to be this kind or that kind –
that you will be the kind that you're required to be in a particular moment.
If it’s morning, you’re a morning person.
If it’s evening you’re a evening person.
If you’re not required to be a person, you’re not a person.
That is, you become flexible.
This flexibility we start working with your body to start with;
afterwards it should come to every aspect of your life.
Your physical structure,
your psychological structure,
your emotional structure,
your karmic structure,
everything should become flexible,
that it can be whatever it is required to be,
it is not stuck being this way or that way.
So, yoga as a process,
yoga as a method,
yoga as a technology,
yoga as a science
is essentially
to break the limitations of a certain concretization that happens,
which we call as personality
to evolve from being a person to a presence.
If you’re a person
that means you have made a shell out of yourself.
You formed a shell –
within that shell only you can operate.
If you break the shell, you will no more be a person
but simply a presence,
as life is,
as God is,
just a presence.
If it can be encased in a shell, it becomes a person.
So yoga means
slowly you’re working on making this shell thinner and thinner,
more and more porous,
that one day you can exist without a shell.
So essentially in your experience,
yoga means morning
Why the sadhana the way it is, is
All aspects of physicality are cyclical in the universe.
Planets are going around the sun,
the solar system are moving,
everything in the galaxy in the cosmos is cyclical.
The more and more you’re identified with your physical system,
the more and more cyclical you are also.
Your experiences are cyclical;
the process of life is cyclical.
If you watch carefully enough,
even the situations that you face in your life come in cycles.
So yoga means, on one level
to break the cycle of life.
What is a circle right now,
we want to open it up and make it a straight line.
Because if you are going in circles,
if I say you’re going in circles
what does it mean to you?
You’re not going anywhere.
It just gives you an impression that you’re going somewhere
but you’re not really going anywhere,
you’re going through the same thing again and again.
So yoga means to open up the circle
and stretch it out like a straight line,
that if you follow the line you go somewhere,
you’re not going round and round.
Many of you may have already experimented and noticed
If you have not,
do not experiment because I’ll give you the results of the experience… experiment right now.
You might have been doing sadhana for two years,
three years, five years.
Stop your sadhana for three months,
suddenly you will see so many compulsions
that you never imagined were a part of you,
which were long time gone,
suddenly they will all become a part of you.
But those who are doing their sadhana properly,
they eat in the morning,
they don’t think of food till evening;
it doesn’t occur because
it’s no more a compulsion.
If you eat, it’s consciously you eat;
otherwise no.
You stop your sadhana for three months and see;
your hands will just grab just about anything and put it in the mouth.
These compulsions will suddenly come back
If you just break the sadhana,
because nature is not going to release you so simply.
You have to work at it and work at it and work at it;
otherwise you must be happy doing the circle.
A circle also can be described as a circus.
If you become conscious, the whole thing looks like a circus.
If you are not conscious, you can only see three feet in front of you, then it’s all real.
If you can see the whole circle of your life, suddenly it becomes like a circus.
Once you realize this circus, you don’t want to go through
this circus again and again.
Only if your vision is too limited, you can see only three feet
in front of you, everything is real for you.
If you open up and see the whole circle the way you’re going,
it looks like a circus and definitely you don’t want it to continue forever,
you want to do something about it.
So these cycles,
these repetitive cycles of compulsiveness is coming because
there are various types of memories in the system.
Memories, karmic memories
Information essentially means memory, isn’t it?
Do you understand what I’m saying? Tch
Any information means memory, isn’t it?
How do you carry information?
Only by memory, there is no other way.
Either in your head or in a chip or in a computer, it doesn’t matter,
you can carry information only by memory,
there is no other way any information can stay anywhere.
So there’s a huge volume of memory, karmic memory,
genetic memory, mental and psychological memory, every kind.
If this memory was not there, your body wouldn’t even take a form.
Your body knows that it has to take this form.
When you were in your mother’s womb,
so many billions of people on the planet,
everybody took this form, two legs, two hands, two eyes, like this.
If the memory was not there,
we do not know what form it would have taken.
It never ever happened that
a woman delivered an elephant
or an insect or something else;
it never ever happened, because there is memory.
If the memory is not there,
this could have taken on any form.
So you have retained your physical form the way it is
only because of memory.
Memory means past.
Yes?
Memory means always that which is past.
If memory is the only thing,
if information that you carry,
which is memory, is the only thing which determines the nature of who you are right now,
that means you are past or life is past you.
There is no real life; it’s just a play of memory.
If you go and watch a cinema
(In Tamil: What? Rajini Kanth?
(Referring to a famous Tamil Actor))
if the cinema happens it’s so big and so real,
more real than the real,
it becomes a bigger reality than reality because it’s so exaggerated.
But all this is just memory being played out.
It’s recorded in a film or a digital format
or whichever way,
it’s just memory, it’s already over.
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Indians don't know the greatness of this culture.
How to bring back the pride Sadhguru?
Sadhguru: I think one thing we have to do is
write a more
re-write a more responsible history of what has happened in this land for a long time.
Not in the last three thousand years,
not in the fourteen hundred years.
What people in this land have done for a long time has to be brought back.
In other countries people are studying this.
If you go to
there are Lebanese people?
If you
if you study in a school in Lebanon,
you will read about how Indian workers,
Indian sculptures,
Indian elephants,
Indian yogis came and built a Phoenician temple
four thousand three hundred years ago in Lebanon,
which is called as Baalbek,
which is a phenomenal temple.
Four thousand three hundred years ago
some of the foundation stones are over three hundred tons
and there is no granite in Lebanon,
they transported it all the way from Egypt across the canal
and up the mountain and put it up there.
Indian elephants, workers and sculptors worked.
The proof… there is enough proof but one proof is visually hanging there is,
lotuses in the ceiling.
Indian sculptor has to put a lotus wherever he goes.
Where would a Lebanese sculptor have seen a lotus?
Obviously there are not lotuses there.
So how many Indian children have
forget about children, how many Indian grown-ups have heard about this?
No.
The Tamil kings went and built Angkor Thom and Angkor Vat in Cambodia.
Angkor Thom is the largest religious building on this planet.
The intricacy and the engineering,
the sheer design and engineering of how these temples are built
if you go and see,
you will feel proud of being a human being,
because if human beings can think something like this
a thousand years ago and manifest it,
it is too much.
This was done by the Tamil kings,
most of the work done by probably the Tamil labor.
From first standard to twelfth standard
does any Tamil child even read a line about this in their history book?
No,
we only read how we were conquered,
raped,
looted,
beaten by other people.
Then …if there is no pride
why would you want to recreate it?
You need to understand this
a culture or a nation is just an idea.
When human beings attach
take this on as an identity,
attach some pride to it,
it burns through one’s mind and into his heart;
now he wants to protect it, rise it, keep it clean, keep it wonderful.
If you do not build pride into it
then people will want to avoid it.
Everybody will want to avoid it.
Now whatever you think is most successful in the world
you will want to imitate that.
Today our idea of success has become purely economic
not aesthetic,
not…it is not intelligence that we value,
it is not wisdom that we value,
it is not beauty or aesthetics that we value,
it is not spiritual attainments that we value.
“Who is the big man in Coimbatore” if I ask
people will only name the richest man in the town.
They will not name the wisest man in town,
the most beautiful man in town,
most meditative man in town -
no.
The richest man in town is the biggest man.
So who is the biggest whatever,
whichever is the richest nation,
whichever is the richest culture
power and money have become the highest goals,
which itself is a very rudimentary way of looking at life.
Because of that
right now I promised the American meditators
next two years I am going to invest a lot of time in United States
because knowingly or unknowingly they have taken on the leadership in the world;
in the sense,
see, …if all the American people wear blue workman’s clothes
half the world is wearing American’s workman’s clothes.
You just go to any city,
Mumbai or Chennai or Bangalore especially,
you look down below the knees,
more than sixty percent is wearing blue denims.
When
We have the most intricate weaves
there’re over hundred and twenty weaves in the country,
which are unique and many of them are dying;
no other culture on the planet has the variety of weaves that India has.
All of them will die;
Chinese silk is going to kill it,
unless all of you ladies make at least twenty percent of your wardrobe into
hand-made Indian weaves,
they will all vanish in the next ten - fifteen years
Why is everybody wearing
not even American executive’s clothes,
American workman’s clothes?
Th…as if that’s not enough,
if they tear their trousers
everybody tears their trousers.
Yes
It's all torn but in a very expensive way
Now if Americans put carbon dioxide in a bottle and drink it
even a kindergarten child knows
human body needs oxygen not carbon dioxide,
but because America drinks carbon dioxide
and says ‘This is the real thing’,
more than half the world drinks carbon dioxide,
you know carbonated water today.
If you go to one of the remote villages here,
there maybe people
not in this area maybe but anywhere else if you go
they might not have heard the word yoga
but they know what is coco-cola,
okay
So I thought if Americans tear their trousers everybody tears,
Americans wear their pants down in their seat everybody does the same thing,
Americans drink carbon dioxide, everybody does that.
So I thought if we can get America to meditate
the world will meditate (Laughs).
So we’re doing a little bit of a big push in the next two years in United States.
We want America to meditate
They’re kind of getting ready,
they’re tired of the carbonated water.
Vinita Bali: So, Sadhguru, what is a creative mind?
Sadhguru: Oh!
How big an answer do you want?
Vinita Bali: As big as you want it.
Sadhguru: See, the English word mind doesn’t say anything
because it’s just one generic word,
which does not describe different dimensions of what the mind is.
Mind is not just one something sitting here (Gestures) and doing something, okay?
There is really no such thing as mind.
In the yogic culture, there is no mind.
There is a physical body, there is a mental body
because what you are calling as mind right now is a certain combination of memory and intelligence.
There is memory in your body,
more memory in your body than you can imagine.
If I have to get at you again, it’s okay, I’m picking on you.
You definitely don’t remember how your great-great-great-great-great-grandmother looked like
but her nose is sitting on your face right now.
Yes?
Vinita Bali: Yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t remember a thing consciously
but your body remembers one hundred percent.
How ten generations ago, your grandmother was, your body still remembers.
A million years ago, how your forefathers were, your… still your body remembers, isn’t it?
It’s not forgotten and it’s not going to forget.
Your mind is not capable of this kind of memory.
Your body has a trillion times more memory than your so-called brain.
This whole shift towards the brain and intellectual process
is a European malaise
they gave too much significance to thought.
This has happened because they lived under a subjugated society,
religiously subjugated society where you are not supposed to think anything
except what’s written in some book, otherwise you are dead.
They lived like this for a longtime.
Because of this, when they got little freedom to think and managed to live,
they started celebrating their thought too much.
Let’s understand the context of thought.
You can only think from the data that you already have gathered.
That means you can never think anything new.
You can recycle it,
you can rehash it,
you can produce permutations and combinations of it
but you cannot think something absolutely new.
It is not in the nature of the thought to come up with something new.
It can only recycle the past.
That means if you dedicate yourself to your thought process,
if you enshrine your thought process,
you are ensuring nothing new ever happens in your life.
So thought need not be celebrated like this.
That’s why in this culture, thought is never been given so much significance.
What you think is your psychological drama.
We don’t think much about that (Laughs)
because it’s your drama.
Your drama is important for you, somebody else’s drama, it’s important for them,
everybody thinks their drama is the most important drama in the universe.
This is everybody’s experience
because they are so identified with their own psychological drama.
This psychological drama should not determine the nature of your life
because this is just a small happening compared to the life process.
Life is a much deeper intelligence than intellect.
We can look at
The yogic system looks at the mind as sixteen parts.
Those sixteen parts are further broken
and they’re taken up to 84,000 parts.
But now, if I talk about 84,000, already there’s a segment which says no,
so I will make it four.
I am taking away eighty, okay?
I’m being fair to you - only four!
Four fundamental parts.
One is the intellect, which we have
In modern world, in today’s world,
we are unnecessarily giving too much significance to intellect
and we will pay an enormous price for this.
You will come to a place where you’ll know everything
but you’ll know nothing of life significance,
really.
Today, you will see this happening to children.
For the first time, this generation you see
ten, eleven-year-old or twelve-year-old children, they look bored.
When you were ten-eleven, you did not what is boredom, it was not possible.
It was too exciting to be alive and looking around.
You will see ten, twelve-year-old children, all looking bored
because they’ve seen the cosmos through their phone screen.
They know it all
and especially in the western countries, you will see this happening at eight-ten,
they are really bored.
You will see in the school buses, they are all sitting like this (Gestures) (Laughter),
bored,
because by the time you are twelve, you already had one love affair,
you know what is a break,
you know how to… all this recover from that,
you tasted alcohol,
you’ve seen this,
probably you’ve gone into all kinds of physical things
and you know the cosmos.
What more?
By the time you’re fifteen, there’s really no purpose for you to exist, for many of them.
You should not be surprised,
if this culture continues
I’m not saying this as a prediction,
it is something that I see beginning to happen
in another fifty or hundred years’ time,
if twenty-five to fifty percent of the people commit suicide, you should not be surprised
because life needs some exuberance.
If too much information happens to you without experience,
that exuberance will be gone and a sense of… false sense of knowing becomes so strong in you.
This is the danger of intellect because intellects wants to
intellect wants to dissect everything.
Intellect is like a scalpel - the sharper it is, the better it is.
It wants to dissect and know.
Dissection works with some things, not with all aspects of life.
If you want to know… The poor frog, you know,
you remember, tch,
the poor frog that you crucified and cut
and great knowledge you acquired from all that torture is unbelievable (Laughter).
How much knowledge you know
For the torture that that frog went through,
how much knowledge you have acquired is quite unbelievable.
All that you got to know.
Now you’ve got interest… suddenly you got interested,
the mother that you had ignored, you want to know your mother today.
Please get yourself a sharp knife,
start the dissection.
You may know everything about her liver, kidney, heart
but you won’t have a mother left, that’s all.
So, life cannot be known by breaking it up.
You can know physical things by breaking it up.
You cannot know life by breaking it into pieces
but this is the nature of the intellect.
The whole modern science has evolved from human intellect.
Because it’s produced technological benefits,
you can’t argue against it
because people, you know (Laughs),
they… they think they are scientists, they know nothing about science.
They’re just enjoying their iPhone.
They think they are scientists because they can do this (Gestures).
No, technology is fine, it’s brought much comfort and convenience
but it’ll not bring life to us.
So, intellect is like this.
Intellect will be useful only depending upon what it is identified with
and what is held, what holds this, how steadily.
So, the next dimension of the mind
The first one is called as buddhi, which is the intellect.
The second one is called as ahankara.
Ahankara does not mean ego, this, that,
it means the identity.
Whatever you’re identified with,
your intellect functions only around that.
Simple,
if you just identify with a nation, if you say, “I’m an Indian,”
everything Indian looks beautiful.
If you cross the border and you say you are something else,
all that looks beautiful.
So, whatever you’re identified with, it’s only with that the intellect functions.
So ahankara is the identity.
How consciously and how steadily your ahankara has been created
will determine the effectiveness of your intellect.
Just because it’s sharp, it does not mean it’ll be effective
because sharp intellect or a sharp knife can cause any amount of damage to you.
If you have a sharp knife and you don’t have a steady hand,
you will cut yourself all over the place.
That’s all that’s happening.
Human suffering is just this
you don’t know how to hold this intellect in your hand properly.
Every day, you’re cutting yourself.
Self… All suffering is on self-help because
your own mind causing this to you all the time.
No matter what happens, people suffer, whichever way, they suffer,
because they don’t know how to hold this intellect.
If you had the mind of an earthworm, you would be quite peaceful.
Yes (Laughs)?
You’re trying to do it in so many ways to reduce the sharpness of the intellect
by drink, by drug, by overeating, by doing all kinds of things,
somehow to take away the sharpness
because the damn thing hurts.
It hurts not because that’s its nature,
it hurts because you do not know how to hold it.
The next dimension of the mind is called as manas,
which is a huge volume of memory.
It is not here or there, entire body carries memory.
So manomayakosha, this is called, a huge sack of memory.
This memory is in various stacks, we’ll not go into all these details
considering some people have said a clear no.
They don’t want to have a mind, I’m sorry,
they don’t want to know anything about the mind (Laughter).
So, the fourth dimension of the mind is called as chitta.
Chitta means it’s pure intelligence.
It is unsullied by memory,
it has no trace of any kind of memory,
it’s just pure intelligence.
If you touch this, then you have access to what you are referring as
the source of creation
because all kinds of things might have been fed to you
god is this, god is love, god is compassion, god is kind, what… whatever (Laughs).
Somebody come, stand on the edge of this stage, say all the prayer you want to say and fall.
Let me see whether compassion happens to you or a cracked bone happens to you,
I would like to check, all right?
All these things have been made up
because whatever somebody is deprived of,
they will attribute that quality to their idea of god.
Your ideas of god have come only because
you do not know what… how this whole creation happened.
Because you don’t have an answer, you made it up.
Because you are human being, you said,
“A big human being is sitting up there. Oh, how can he do all this?”
if somebody asked, he has ten hands,
so he does lot of things not like you, whatever.
It’s all right for children
but essentially, because you do not how creation happened,
you are coming up with explanations.
So, that which is the source of creation
don’t believe what I say, what anybody says -
pay attention to one piece of creation.
Just take a flower, pay attention to this,
pay an attention to a leaf or an atom or an ant
all you will see is phenomenal intelligence beyond anything you can imagine.
Yes?
But nobody told you, “God is intelligence.”
But this culture has said this to you in many ways -
they told you chidhakasha, chidambara and so many things to tell you,
if you touch your chit, the whole existence becomes yours.
Everything that’s worth knowing is right here (Gestures)
because you have access to the source of creation.
So, these are the four types of your… four dimensions of your mind.
Unfortunately, the modern education thinks by just
feeding information and keeping the intellect reasonably sharp, everything is going to happen
no
You will rip this planet apart looking for well-being,
you may lose the planet or you may manage to go to another planet and start your work again there (Laughter)
but well-being will not happen.
If well-being has to happen, you have to dig a little deeper into this one (Referring to oneself),
otherwise no.
[Sadhguru] There was a terrible actor, a truly lousy actor who was playing Hamlet.
As the play went on it got worse. When he came to the famous,
‘To be or not to be’ soliloquy, people started throwing things at him. They took their footwear and threw it.
So he got offstage and said, ‘Well folks, I didn’t write this crap.’
All the miserable people in the world think there is something wrong with the creation;
all the miserable people in the world think Creator has made a mistake.
To explain this mistake or to explain themselves into that mistake, they have all kinds of philosophies.
All the philosophies on the planet if you put them together, all the philosophies on the planet if you put them together,
all of them together do not have the beauty of a single leaf in this tree
but still it occupies people for a lifetime because it gives them the kind of explanations that they like to hear.
Philosophers are usually out-of-work men – not many women philosophers, uh?
Out-of-work men who at least have an explanation as to why they’re out of work.
So these out-of-work men, who have nothing else to do or nothing else to create, keep churning up philosophies.
Anybody coming up with any kind of philosophy is sacrilege against creation.
Nobody has any business even to generate a single thought when so much has been done.
If you come here a thousand lifetimes and 24 hours if you pay attention,
still you will not know a miniscule part of creation.
When this kind of creation is here, anybody thinking up their own nonsense is absolute sacrilege,
but socially, unfortunately, the world has reached a point
where if you say something that nobody understands, most people believe you’re being very intelligent.
Intelligence is in being able to make people understand what they could not understand.
Intelligence is not in what people knew perfectly well for ages - confuse the hell out of them.
That’s not intelligence. But unfortunately it passes off as being smart, being intelligent.
People have fallen in love with words and lost the world. It’s time to regain it.
If you… If you stand on the summit of the garbage heap of one's mind, your feet will never touch the ground.
If your feet never touch the ground, you will never know what this is.
It is for this reason that in this culture wherever you see people go all out down,
they want their whole body to touch the ground, not just the feet.
Most part of their life or most part of the day, the very culture was designed in such a way
that you walk barefoot unless you’re going on rough terrain because we want you to be in touch with the earth.
If you don’t get anything else, if you as much as sit like this for 10 days,
you will know a lot more than reading a thousand books because if you just sit like this,
Mother Earth will creep up into you without your permission. Don’t believe that.
She need not creep up, because as this little bit of grass has shot out of the earth,
you also just like that, little mobile, otherwise right now as you sit here
you are just a mound of earth, that’s all you are.
You may believe yourself to be something, but that's all you are. And that's not small.
If you believe yourself to be something other than that you are small;
otherwise you’re the planet itself, you’re the creation itself.
So you’re just a bump on the planet and don’t think that's small.
Velliangiri Mountains also small bump on the planet; Himalayas also small bump on the planet; you too.
It’s in being in touch with reality in every possible way that one will know,
not by thinking up nonsense which may pass in a tea party; existentially it will not pass.
It may pass with a bunch of fools that you’ve gathered around you in the form of society;
it will not pass in the eyes of the Creator.
If you do not pass in the eyes of the Creator,
all the other distinctions that you may attain are just empty stuff, it will not stand by you.
When the time to shed this coil, when the time to put earth back into earth comes, it will not stand by you, for sure.
(Sadhguru): We never said body is not important.
Body is fine
but body is limited isn’t it?
Yes?
Body is the limited possibility
When you are young
you think body is unlimited
but if you have little sense
you can see body is very limited. Isn’t it?
So is there something wrong with being limited.
Nothing wrong
it is just that your nature is such
that it cannot settle for anything limited.
Please see.
Yes?
Once you come with a human form
it cannot settle for the limited.
If you give it this it will ask for that
If you ask for that it will… if you give it that
it will ask for that
if you give it that it will ask for this
Endlessly it will ask.
Because it is seeking the unbounded.
So body can never really fulfill you
because you will not settle for the limited.
So we are talking about going beyond the body
not because we think something wrong with the body
simply because you cannot settle for the limited.
If you settle for the limited today
tomorrow you will be frustrated with it.
You will want something more;
something more;
something more;
how much more do you want?
You want to become unlimited.
Please look at the desire –
your desire is always to become unlimited.
Whatever you know through that
it’s trying to become unlimited.
That’s all.
So body,
the limitations of the body will not allow you to be fulfilled.
So we have seen how to go beyond it.
This does not mean neglect the body.
This does not mean destroy the body.
This does not mean body is not important or body is wrong.
It’s only through the vehicle of the body all this nonsense you can do isn’t it?
If you destroy the vehicle what to do?
No,
we are not talking about destroying the body at all.
We are not talking about ignoring the body
but using the body to the limited dimension it is
and see how to go beyond that
because if you don’t see that
you will never know fulfillment
because body is the limitation.
Body is a tremendous limitation isn’t it?
It’s a tremendous possibility
but still a tremendous limitation isn’t it?
[Mr. Chaudhry] Sadhguru, first of all, thank you for having this 'Conversation with Mystic' series in Delhi.
Delhi has disproportionate influence on the health and karma
of this nation. So we always welcome you in Delhi and share your wisdom with us.
First question, Sadhguru. In your closing comment on the education segment,
you talked about the marvel that human body is, the importance
to have good pregnancy, raise good children, educate good children.
Recent medical research shows that mother's milk for a male child and
a female child is different. In fact, it is so magical that if a mother has twins,
a male and a female child at the same time, the milk for the male child and
the milk for the female child is also different.
[Sadhguru] Did you know that in the culture, we've always known this?
Your grandmother has always known this. It's just that, what we have always known,
you have to do a billion dollar research today,
that's the whole problem.
[Mr. Chaudhry] So the first question, Sadhguru, is - you're probably among the busiest people
in this country. You...... those of us who've seen you work, it's well past midnight.
You're probably up... if at all you are sleep by three AM and
health is all about stamina and fitness and remaining in a peak state of awareness.
Would you be happy to share the magic of what you do to stay alert and
healthy with such power.
[Sadhguru]... I don't get to do most of the things I know I should do about myself,
because of the schedule and the travel. Usually, I am...an important
part of health is - how you eat. And most of the time, I'm eating in somebody's home.
So I have to eat to their satisfaction, not to my health.
You know, this is India. Hospitality means you must eat two people's food,
not one! So considering all that, I have...... the choice is gets quite restricted.
So what do I do? What... I say right now, may not be
a practical suggestion, because you can't take it as a tip and do this.
I do every day one twenty seconds of sadhana.
That is I just let my energies run through a overhaul in the morning
and that's all I do. I have no regular exercise regimen;
I don't walk every day, I... - Nothing! But since I am twenty-five years of age
to this day, my weight has not varied more than two kilograms.
I have been seventy-four, seventy-five since I was twenty-five.
It's just that little from my shoulder, it slipped little down.
It was all on my shoulder, now kind of going towards the earth.
Except for that, which I am wanting to correct.
So this is not a practical suggestion, but there are ways to do your health,
in ways other than physical ways. Maybe you have not heard of, maybe
you have, a couple of times in the last ten-twelve years, doctors
have written me off as, for sure, you won't make it' kind of thing
because all my systems were failing because of certain things that happened.
But I've come out of that, just in a matter of days or weeks, because,
you need to understand this - this whole body was manufactured from inside,
not from outside. You provided the raw material from outside,
but the piece of bread that you eat becomes human body from inside.
So there is an intelligence here, there is a competence here,
which creates this body. If you have access to that, if there is a repair job
to be done, would you go to the manufacturer or the local tinker?
If you have lost access to the manufacturer, you go to the local tinker;
otherwise you go to the manufacturer. Most of you take your cars
to the company service station, isn't it? Not to the local tinker
unless you're in some place where you have no access.
This is possible for every human being. It is just that,
they think it's not important to... pay attention to the source of their creation.
They think something else is more important, which amazes me.
How is this possible? But somehow,... a large segment of the population
thinks, something else is more important than
that which is the very source of your creation.
Your thoughts and emotions are more important than something of this intelligence,
that is, it can transform a piece of bread, into such a sophisticated mechanism
called a 'human being.' When such a level of intelligence is there within us,
I cannot understand how anybody can ignore it. It's always,
though I've lived this long in this world and I've worked with people continuously,
it still amazes me. How is it? How is it that they can ignore this?
[Mr. Chaudhry] Sadhguru, so long as we're alive, we breathe and we have this beautiful instrument
of the human body, in Isha Yoga Center, you place a lot of emphasis on two things -
the posture and breathing. How these two things impact our health?
See the way we sit, for example, people who a're on the path of Hata yoga spend
a lifetime learning how to sit. A logically thinking person cannot understand,
why should somebody spend a lifetime learning how to sit?
Health, you're talking about health, I'm sorry.
There are other dimensions to it, but coming to health - if you have to be healthy,
you have to be at ease. This is like, you're driving your car, you may be -
What do you drive, Sanjeev? 'M,'... 'M' is not a Maruti, okay?
So, you're driving a good car. It's a wonderful machine, but drive it
without the engine oil. In ten minutes, it'll be junk. Yes or no?
Because there is no ease, lubrication is lost.
So when you say you're stressful, you're anxious, you're disturbed by this and
that, what you're saying is, your lubrication is lost.
It is not because of the speed at which you're traveling,
you're struggling. It is because there is no ease, there is no lubricant inside.
And everything is friction. When there is friction, there will be stress.
Drive your car for ten minutes without engine oil and see what happens.
However great your car is, it'll be gone.
So bringing this to ease - there are too many things to it, I can't go about.
One simple thing is - today fortunately,
they put these kind of chairs for you. Otherwise, these days slowly,
you know we're getting European furniture-makers in India, big-time now.
So, you go to United States and sit down in a sofa, you have no choice,
you anyway become like this. You have no choice about how you sit.
Like this. Now you need to understand this - if
there's something called as muscular comfort, skeletal comfort, organ comfort.
Muscular and skeletal comfort is largely... just comfort, comfort it is.
It is needed at some times. But your organs should be comfortable
for you to be healthy.
If you take all the vital organs in your body
I am putting it in a very simplistic way - considering the time -
all these vital organs in your body, they are not fixed with clamps and nuts and bolts;
they are hanging in nets like this. Only if you sit like this
with your spine erect, your organs are at maximum comfort. You sit like this
they collapse one on top of each other.
Now how do they function well? They will not function well.
So in a day, if you're sitting like this for eight, ten hours, you're asking for it.
You're just asking for it. It's like you want to drive your car on two wheels,
one day if you flip around to show off, it's okay. Every day if you drive like this,
it's not going to last. That... that's happening to your body all the time.
So maintaining a certain level of organ comfort is very important if all these things
have to function well.
See, you may not be medically diagnosed as 'diseased' or you have an ailment,
but I would say... Pardon me for my percentages, I would say over
eighty-five percent of the people do not know what's health.
They've not experienced it. Maybe they knew it as children
where they bounced around. If you're healthy, you feel like bouncing around.
That means you're grave. You know your destination.
So, this sense of gravity has entered you, not because of age,
not because you've become profound, simply because there is no ease,
either in the mind or in the body. So... it's trying to save itself.
It is trying to live in a limited way. It is not trying to live,
it is trying to save life and curtail it and hang on for a little while longer.
So keeping the body at ease is most important.
Coming to mind and other things, there are so many things.
Apart from that, if you learn to sit right...; you know, in seventies,
late seventies or eighties, when you first got your television,
you were watching your television, which was a one-channel wonder,
and you're watching your favorite program - you know what it was
and suddenly, it went bup, bup, bup.
Then you go up on the terrace, there is a piece of aluminum there,
you try to do this and this doesn't come. Then very carefully, you bring it to that level
suddenly the world pours into your house.
Once again the world is back in your sitting room,
simply because, you got the aluminum piece to the right position.
You need to understand, you are who you are, only because of
what you have perceived, isn't it? Perception means you must be like an antenna.
The whole system of yoga is just this. You learn to hold your body right.
Now, if I go anywhere even in India, you know,
because they think if you wear Indian clothes, you're archaic.
You have to be in Western clothes to be modern
And they'll give me a chair with armrests like this
because they have lost their flexibility, they can't cross their legs,
they all sit like this and every two minutes, they keep shifting and shifting.
If I sit like this, I'll sit the whole day like this, because the body is at ease.
Now if I have to think, if I have to perceive, the body has to be in a certain way.
They don't perceive anything; they got everything stored in their iPad.
It's a very different world. Health is not just physical. There a're a whole lot of
dimensions to it, isn't it? Unless this... this human being feels complete
in every way, you cannot say he is healthy, isn't it?
So we have a phenomenal sense of what human mechanism is.
I want you to know this. Being Indians, being in Delhi,
which is the capital of India, I want you to know this -
this is not my nasture... nationalistic fervor, this is a reality -
nowhere else on the planet, no culture, at any time in the history of humanity,
has looked at human mechanism with as much profoundness as
we have looked at it here. If you destroy this knowledge,
if it is not a living knowledge, it is only with a few people, it is no good.
We have to live it.
This is the greatest advantage we had and it is showing in many ways.
Though our people... sixty percent of the population is malnourished
in the country right now, their physical bodies, their skeletal system has not grown
to full size - still in spite of this, I speak across the planet to all kinds of people,
highest level of academics, scientists, tribal women, rural people, all kinds -
I always find, traveling around the world, I always find
the basic general intellect in India is way higher than most places on the planet.
But it has no expression. In other places, they have found systems
to allow people to find expression to their intelligence.
Here, we're blocking it in a million different ways, in spite of that, you can't kill it.
But if you keep them malnourished for another generation or two,
this intellect which came because of thousands of years of breeding carefully,
doing the right things with life - we call this 'Samskriti' that means
doing the right things with life.
Life does not mean party. Life means this that you're doing the right things with this,
so that this gradually evolves to a higher and higher space.
Because of this, so many things happened in this country.
So many wonderful things were invented, so much knowledge and
knowing happened. But now, that knowledge and that possibility,
we are not able to pass it on large-scale to our children,
which is the greatest tragedy the country is going through right now.
Sadhguru: But he must be punished? (Laughter)
Either by you or somebody he must be punished. (Laughter and Applause)
What kind of punishment do you normally give to people? (Laughter)
Already enough of punishment has been given, isn’t it?
Already it’s been given -
the ugliness,
the nastiness,
the silent treatment
everything has happened,
so what more punishment you want to give?
Your thing is,
there is no remorse on other side.
There is no remorse on the other side because
people are doing what they want to do,
not what you want them to do,
always.
And that may not be in your interest,
but they are doing what they want to do.
Is it right, wrong -
I am not going into the morality of it.
I want you to understand the mechanics of the situation.
Somebody is doing what they want to do;
now you think they must be punished,
probably they have not broken any law,
otherwise they would be anyway punished.
They’re breaking an understanding between two people;
probably you misunderstood the understanding.
You believed that these understandings are absolute;
they are not.
Nowhere in the history of humanity
or today or in anytime in future,
will human relationships be absolute,
though every
every person who gets little romantic,
believes that this is going to be an absolute relationship,
there is no such thing about it.
A relationship is a variable, always;
you have to conduct it on a daily basis.
One day if you don’t conduct it properly it may go somewhere.
Yes or no?
No,
please look at it as it is.
You have to conduct it right,
so ‘No I am doing my best,’ -
obviously somebody feels your best is not good enough for them.
I want you to come to terms with this.
This is not about
I am not saying what they doing is right or wrong,
that’s not for me to say,
all I am saying is this is how human beings are functioning for ages and still are.
I am saying first of all you need to understand
relationships will never, ever be absolute,
they will be variables that… you
it’s juggling,
that you have to do.
If you are juggling with five balls one sometimes,
it will spill out,
takes lot of skill and attention.
Yes or no?
You’re married many of you;
doesn’t it take lot of skill and attention?
If you don’t pay any attention
you don’t know what the hell is happening. (Laughs)
It takes a lot of attention, isn’t it?
Someone just called me,
from some country in Europe
and
‘Sadhguru I am just doing housework, come and save me. (Laughter)
Take me away to your ashram;
I am just doing house work.’
She is washing dishes and stuff,
well very affluent but has four children,
so all the time there is thing to do endlessly. (Laughs)
And today the maid did not turn up
so you have to wash the dishes,
four children are there,
you got to wash the dishes,
you got to wash everything. (Laughs)
So I am saying,
you need to understand this,
a relationship is a variable reality,
it is not an absolute reality.
If you want to have an absolute relationship
you must hold relationships with the dead.
That’s the reason why lot of people choose God
because it’s an absolute.
You can handle it whichever way you want.
If you didn’t think of him for ten days,
another eleventh day if you think of him,
he is still there. (Laughter)
You do that to your husband or wife or somebody
then (Laughs)
something else will happen.
You went away,
got busy forgot about God for three years
again you can think; still there. (Laughter)
So if you want to have an absolute relationship
you must
you should not choose human beings.
Human relationships are variables,
needs lot of attention.
So that’s why some people decide in their life,
they don’t have the time and the energy to manage such things,
so they take another path
where there is no such obligation,
they close their eyes,
they are by themselves.
They don’t care,
who is around them, what’s around them.
So you can't do that.
So I think it’s best
in trying to punish somebody you will only end up punishing yourself,
they doing what they want to do
it’s best that you see what is it that you really want with your life;
you don’t have to react with them
and do something stupid like them.
You just have to sit down and look at this;
when your illusions are broken,
you’re disillusioned right now;
it’s a very good thing.
If your illusions are broken,
that means life is bringing you closer to reality, isn’t it?
So this is an opportunity for you to sit down and see
‘what is the nature of my life,
why is it?’
See this piece of life is a complete piece of life. Isn't it so?
Is it half a life?
Are you half a life or full life?
Full life.
Why is it that it feels so incomplete
that it needs another person to fill this life,
why is it, it’s time to look at it, isn’t it?
If this is a full life this is complete by itself.
But right now you made it in such a way
that this cannot exist with that one and that one
without that one and that one and that one.
So somewhere it’s an incomplete life
or at least it is not realized the fullness of its nature, isn’t it?
This is a complete piece of life;
packed with Creator and creation together,
very great combination.
If you… this is a time
when life knocks at your door like this,
it’s time you look deeper rather than reacting
and trying to fix somebody else.
Punishing somebody else is not going to transform your life,
not going to make your life beautiful in anyway.
Some sick satisfaction you will have for two days,
after that you will feel guilty about that also,
yes?
Initially when this emotion is hot it gives you satisfaction;
after sometime when you look back,
you will feel ashamed of yourself.
So don’t go that way.
This is an opportunity somebody is opening up a spiritual dimension for you
really,
somebody is making you realize how fragile all these things are;
they can cheat you,
they can run away,
they can divorce you
or they can fall dead, isn’t it?
If they fall dead you wouldn’t think he cheated me,
would you think?
No
but whichever way you’re denied, isn’t it?
The important thing is you’re denied something.
How he did it, is not the problem,
he denied you something either by death or divorce or cheating or whatever you call it
but essentially you got denied.
You can be denied only because you are in a certain illusory state of believing
that this is half a life and it needs another half from somewhere.
No this is a complete life,
if you’ve blossomed as a complete life,
you will see relationships will be of a completely different nature.
It will be more of coming together and sharing,
not of extracting;
it has to transform.
If it has to transform you have to transform,
this is a great opportunity somebody has given you.
Stop using these words somebody cheated me,
just say somebody is pushing you towards ultimate reality
from an illusory state,
we must thank that person. (Applause)
You must be grateful.
Instead of keeping you
instead of keeping you in illusion,
instead of keeping you in your life or a whole lifetime,
so soon they are making you realize this (Laughs)
otherwise you will know this at the time of your death.
Yes,
you will know at the time of your death,
when you are dying,
‘I am scared why don’t you come with me?’
He will say ‘no’. (Laughter)
So that last moment instead of knowing
it’s better to know now. (Laughter)
Siddharth: There’s a complaint about India’s youth in general
that they’re very good at announcing problems,
at pointing out problems.
And I won't take names but some of India’s so-called future
some …certain activists who think India should be run differently are very good at pointing out problems
and when asked for solutions they say ‘yeah but there are more problems.’
As somebody who’s been asked this by different people from different walks of life,
do you think there’s a systemic problem with us in accepting solutions
because they are harsh and to extent that point
I have a genuine concern with a lot of people that I see around me
and I think as Indians we need to ask ourselves why this happens,
that in India you go to anybody whose just freshly made a mistake –
it can be a small mistake, he could have stolen ten rupees or it could be a large mistake,
he could have killed someone –
the moment you go and hold his collar and ask him why he did it;
he says ‘you have not been in my shoes. You have not gone through my circumstances.’
For some reason that justifies doing a wrong thing
but if somebody comes and points fingers at problems,
they all join …we all join together and say (In Hindi – ‘yes he is a thief’)
when the truth is we don’t actually stop and look within ourselves.
Is this a systemic problem with this country
because we were discussing earlier about even unhapppy countries like China
being better half that us when it comes to
individual morality and individual responsibility.
So where does India stands in terms of the systemic problem of
‘as long as I do it it’s okay;
as long as somebody else does it, it's a crime.’
Where does that start, where does that stop?
Sadhguru: See, about people making a profession of pointing out problems –
this is becoming a serious problem, okay?
If you try to do anything in this country they want to stop it.
You want to build a dam, there’s a protest,
you want a nuclear project, there’s protest,
thermal project - protest,
windmill - protest;
but everybody wants everything.
In their homes they want all the gadgets – they want twenty-four hours power,
they want everything going –
this is because we are only looking at the problems
and we have not taken up the challenge of creating solutions in our minds
I think this is a kind of a
a pre independence hangover
because –
Mahatma Gandhi brilliantly designed a revolt against the British
not by killing them,
not by shooting at them,
not by bombing installations
but simply by stopping activity -
bandh, hartal, satyagrah came from there –
it was a brilliant device for those days because we were conquered.
But even today if you want to become a leader –
I am just telling you, this is a secret, okay –
suppose you want to become a political leader don’t try to do
don’t try to build a road, build a dam, do this, do that, no;
gather one hundred of your fans and block a highway,
make our lives miserable,
you will become a leader. (Applause)
Yes, unfortunately yes.
You stop the train, you stop the road…, cut the water; cut the electricity;
you will become the leader.
If you make something happen you will get ignored ofcourse.
making the nation go
and making the nation stop are two different kinds of technologies.
Mahatma Gandhi mastered the art of making the nation stop,
and it was contextually the right thing too for those times
because we were being ruled by somebody else.
But we’re still doing the same thing.
State governments are demanding that they must have a right to call for a bandh;
bandh means closure. (Laughs)
I cannot understand how an administration can call for a bandh. (Laughs)
But they are actually saying it's their right to call for a bandh.
Close down something and you will rise in your prominence.
This must change.
We should never identify people who stop something in this country as leaders.
This must be done by all the citizens.
Whoever stops something in this nation should never, ever be our leader.
Whoever makes things happen in this country; he must be the leader, isn't it? (Applause)
Questioner: My name is Siya,
I am a thirteen-year old girl
what code of conduct would you tell a thirteen-year old child to follow? (Applause)
Sadhguru: You are asking
She is the expert in criminal code (Laughter).
She is asking you?
Kiran Bedi: No she is asking you.
Sadhguru: You are asking her or me?
Kiran Bedi: (Laughs) No she is asking Sadhguru, right bete?
You’re asking Sadhguru, right?
Yes?
Sadhguru: Okay.
No code of conduct.
See, we are trying to replace humanity and human intelligence with morality and ethic,
which is a very wrong way to conduct humanity.
The most important thing is
I want you as a young girl to sit here
today when you go home I want you to just sit there and look at it what makes your life.
Experiment
just close your mouth, hold your nose for two minutes,
you will know breath is important.
Yes?
If you breathe, what you exhale the trees are inhaling,
what the tree exhales you are inhaling.
One half of your breathing apparatus is hanging out there, actually.
Your lungs only one part is here, another part is up on the tree.
If you see this, do I have to tell you
“Next time you’re walking by the tree, don’t pluck the leaf and go, don’t cut the tree,”
do I have to tell you?
There is no need to tell you this.
Similarly in every aspect of life
the food that you eat,
the water that you drink,
the planet that you walk upon,
the people that you encounter.
Use your intelligence.
What is needed is a more sensible world not a moralistic world.
We need a sensible world.
Just exercise your sense. (Applause)
As… a human being
as a human being you have all the necessary faculty to grow up as a full-fledged human being.
I don’t have to put code into you to make you into a human being.
It is just that if you take codes from other people you may cease to be a human being
because there are people who have brought in values into their life,
which makes them inhuman.
You don’t take anybody’s values,
anybody’s morals,
anybody’s ethics,
just as a human being as you breathe, eat, live,
just be conscious and act sensibly,
you will be a wonderful human being. (Applause)
Sadhguru: In appreciation of this commendable cause
that the Dharma Foundation has taken up,
I would like to say that
for thousands of years,
for the longest period compared to anything on this planet,
this wisdom,
this dimension of knowing has lived on,
without any kind of true organization
or a certain kind of leadership
or any other kind of organized support.
Out of sheer efficacy of what it is,
it's just lived on.
A time has come in the world
when
where even truth has to be protected (Laughter).
When we talk about East,
we are not talking about a particular geography.
This must be clearly understood –
we are not talking about East and West
as geographical features in the world.
Any number of great minds in America
have said things
of great reverence and admiration
for the so-called Eastern wisdom.
Thoreau (Referring to American philosopher Henry David Thoreau),
one of the greatest minds America produced,
went out to say,
“Every morning, I bathe my intellect
in this stupendous and cosmogono knowledge from the East.
In comparison,
all our modern world and literature is puny and trivial.”
I think Mark Twain went out to
probably gave out the best compliment to the East.
When he visited India for a little over three months,
he said,
“Anything that can ever be done
either by man or god has been done in this land.”
Any number of others –
Oppenheimer (Referring to American physicist
Walden (Referring to a book by Henry David Thoreau),
Emerson –
any number of people have said many, many things.
Why?
Why is it important?
Why is it important to preserve and nurture this dimension of life?
The fundamental reason
why it seems to be so significantly different is
because it is not a product of human intellect.
It is not deductions that we made out of our intellect.
This dimension comes from a profound inner experience,
where there is no right and wrong,
there is no up and down,
just seeing things the way they are.
And when we say dharma,
we are not talking about a religion,
as modern translators went about interpreting dharma as
Hindu dharma or whatever,
another religion,
because they came from a mindset
that everybody has to belong to some segment of humanity.
They come from a mindset
where humanity has to be divided one way or the other
because they come from the surface intelligence of human nature
which we call as intellect.
Unfortunately, the modern societies,
modern education systems have entirely dedicated themselves
to the human intellect,
completely ignoring other dimensions of intelligence
which definitely exist within us.
When you go by the intellect,
the nature of the intellect is always to dissect and divide
because intellect is essentially discriminatory in nature.
An intellect functions always with a certain identity.
If you have no identity,
you cannot use your intellect.
So with individual identities,
either of race, religion, nationality, caste, creed, gender,
when you apply your intellect,
it’ll split the world into many pieces.
So the significance of what we are referring to as
the spirit of Eastern wisdom is
it does not come from human intellect,
it comes from a deeper dimension of intelligence within us.
When I say a deeper dimension of intelligence,
a simplistic way of looking at it would be
whatever you had for lunch today,
if you had a piece of bread,
over the afternoon,
this bread is being transformed into a human being.
You definitely cannot do that with your intellect.
There’s an intelligence here (Referring to oneself),
which is capable of making a banana into a human being
You definitely cannot do that with your intellect.
A dimension of intelligence which is beyond thought process
Thought, or the product of intellect,
is essentially always functioning
from a limited amount of data that we have gathered.
Now, what we call as Eastern wisdom
is not coming from a limited amount of data that we have gathered,
either from the books or our life experience,
but simply by enhancing our ability to perceive life
in ways that the five sense organs cannot function.
Why I’m talking about the five sense organs is,
all the data that you have ever gathered
which rests in so many aspects within you,
which is the food for the intellect,
comes from the five sense organs.
In the very nature of things,
sense organs cannot perceive the entirety of anything.
If you can see this part of my hand (Gestures),
you cannot see this part of my hand (Gestures).
This is the nature of sense perception.
Even if you take a grain of sand,
if you see one part of it,
you cannot see the other face of it.
Sense organs can only perceive in comparison.
If there is no comparison,
your senses are useless.
Because there is darkness,
you know what is light,
otherwise you just would not know what is light.
If light was on all the time and there was no darkness,
you would not know what is light.
Because there is silence, you know what is sound.
If there was no silence,
you would not have the idea of what is sound.
So always in comparison
It is like
Let's say you’re six feet tall.
Now, you walk like a tall man,
you think like a tall man,
you feel like a tall man,
you are a tall man (Laughter).
You went to another society where everybody is eight feet tall (Laughter).
Suddenly you walk like a short man,
think like a short man,
feel like a short man and you are a short man (Laughter).
So what you perceive in comparison is a distortion of reality.
It is not reality as it is.
So whatever we perceive in comparison is useful for our survival process
but if we want to know… know the nature of this existence,
sense organs are not sufficient instruments.
What is light for you is darkness for many other creatures.
You ever got into an argument with an owl (Laughter)?
If you did, which is light, which is darkness,
where would it go (Laughter)?
It would be endless argument.
Who is right, you or the owl?
Hmm?
Participants: Both.
Sadhguru: Oh! If you’re saying both (Laughter), either you belong to the diplomatic corps (Laughter)
or you have a successful marriage (Laughter/Applause).
You have learned to say, “Both, both, both” for everything (Laughter).
You’re right.
Well, that is the basis of all the problems on the planet –
“I’m right and you are wrong” (Laughter).
The fact of the matter is,
you are perceiving it as it is necessary for your survival,
the owl is perceiving it as it is necessary for his survival.
If survival is all you’re seeking,
your five sense organs and intellect are sufficient instruments.
But if you want to know the nature of the existence,
if you want to know the fundamental laws or dharma which governs life,
the way it happens within us and around us,
then you need an inner perception
or another dimension of intelligence within you.
Otherwise, you will only cut the world into pieces.
In the name of religions,
we have cut the world into… humanity into many pieces
because intellectually we have arrived at our own
conclusions or deductions,
which invariably is bound to divide
because intellect is essentially a knife which cuts.
It can only dissect.
By dissection, you can know certain things.
But if you really want to know someone that you love,
you don’t dissect them, you embrace them (Laughs).
By dissection, you may know the kidney, liver, heart, stuff
but you will not know that being in any sense.
You will lose it completely.
So dissection is the way of the intellect
because it is a sharp instrument.
It has to cut it… cut open everything that’s given to it.
But the East found another way.
Out of profoundness of experience, you can know life.
By turning inward, you can know life.
When I say turning inward,
you must understand that essentially,
the five sense organs are always outward.
You can see what's around you
but you cannot roll your eyeballs inward and scan yourself.
You can hear this (Snaps his fingers)
but so much activity in this body,
you cannot hear this.
If an ant crawls upon this hand, you can feel it.
So much blood flowing, you cannot feel it
because in the very nature of things
sense organs are outward bound.
The moment you dedicate yourself to your intellect,
you also get enslaved to the limitations of your five senses.
It is in this context,
the wisdom of the East is of tremendous significance to the world
because it has transcended this slavery to sense perception
and learned to perceive life in a completely different way.
What is this completely different way?
In English language,
if you say mind, it is just one word.
It is supposed to say everything.
In the yogic culture,
there are sixteen parts to the mind,
sixteen dimensions of human mind.
Now, if I go into sixteen, it would take too much time,
so let me compress it into four (Laughs).
The four aspects of the mind are called
buddhi,
ahankara,
manas
and chitta.
Buddhi means the intellect.
Today, modern world is largely run by the intellect.
So, with this, we can do many things on the outside.
We can go on enhancing the comforts and conveniences of life.
We’ve done very well
in terms of comforts and conveniences.
Never before,
never ever before,
another generation of humanity ever knew
the kind of comforts and conveniences that we have today.
But at the same time,
we are whining like never before (Laughter)
because as the comforts and convenience increase on the outside,
as there is less to complain about what is happening around you,
the emptiness of within echoes within you in a horrible way.
When you’re fighting for survival,
when every day you are struggling to fix small things on the outside,
you will not realize this.
When outside is well settled,
that is when you will see how hollow life has become.
The biggest question in the world –
you will see in the next few decades – is
what the hell are we doing here anyway?
Because everything that needs to be fixed on the outside is done,
now what?
7.2 billion people on the planet
but right now, gradually, it's looming large
loneliness is one of the biggest problems.
Dogs are being tortured to fulfill human loneliness (Laughter).
Because as you dedicate yourself more and more to your intellect,
you will naturally become more and more lonely
because it keeps on dissecting and cutting life into various pieces for examination
and then you will see you yourself will be split up into many parts after some time,
if you go by the intellect hundred percent.
The next dimension of the mind is referred to as ahankara.
Normally, people think it means ego.
No, it means identity.
You’re identified with something.
The moment you’re identified with something,
your intellect will work only to protect that identity,
no matter what, whichever way you think.
Your ideas of which nation you belong to,
which race you belong to,
which culture you belong to,
which religion you belong to,
which gender you belong to,
the moment you get identified,
your intellect will work only to protect that identity.
So, it is a certain kind of prejudice.
Well, you may say,
“I’m not prejudiced. I’m very broad-minded.”
All right, it's a broad prejudice (Laughter)
because people are willing to live and die for what they’re identified with
because the nature of the intellect is
if you take away the identity,
it will not know what to do.
It needs a strong identity,
a strong sense of who I am.
If you ask, “Who am I?”
your intellect will not function.
You must know who you are (Laughs) –
a strong sense of belief that this is what I am.
That is when your intellect will function in a certain way.
This is like
Intellect is like a sharp knife.
Ahankara, or the identity, is the hand that holds it.
All the suffering on the planet
When was the last time when somebody stabbed you,
even though you’re living in LA (Referring to Los Angeles), I am asking
When was the last time it happened?
Never happened.
Maybe when you were in school, somebody poked you with a pin, at the most
or they… even that did not happen,
they ignored you (Laughter).
Or what I’m saying is
how much suffering for a human being is actually coming from outside?
Almost nothing.
Rest is all self-help (Laughter)
because this (Referring to the intellect) is a sharp knife given to you.
Unsteady hand,
every day it's cutting itself.
You know, we were (Laughs)… We were trekking in Nepal and Tibet region
and I was in a tent.
Someone was cutting an apple
and someone else, another person says,
“This is a very sharp knife, be careful.”
It irritates me because such an obvious thing.
You call it a knife only because it’s sharp (Laughter).
If that damn thing is not sharp, why will I call it a knife (Laughter)?
And if it's a child,
yes.
A full grown man, you don’t tell him it’s a sharp knife (Laughs).
I ignored it and I was working on something.
Another two minutes, again it is said,
“It's a very sharp knife, be careful.”
I said, “Come on, leave him alone (Laughs).
He’s a grown man, leave him alone. This is
He is not handling some super instrument.
A knife!
He should know how to handle a knife.”
“No, no, Sadhguru, it's a very sharp knife” (Laughter).
All right,
I get back to my work.
Two minutes later, he cuts his hand (Laughter),
okay?
Now, the problem is just this,
you’ve been given a sharp knife.
Unsteady hand,
every day cutting yourself.
You may call it stress,
you may call it anxiety,
you may call it fear,
you may call it misery,
you call it what you want.
All that’s happening is your intellect is working against you,
that’s all it is.
Unless somebody is stabbing you from outside, that’s a different issue,
we need to deal with that differently.
Rest is all your own intelligence turning against you.
You may call it thousand different
“No, no, my mother-in-law, my boss, my neighbor.”
They are
They are not stabbing you,
they’re only saying what they want to say.
It is you who is poking yourself because an unsteady hand, that’s all.
But this intellect cannot function without a memory bank.
So what is called as manas is a silo of memory.
There are eight dimensions of memory.
Let's not go into the detail but you know this much –
there is a conscious memory.
Today, they’re recognizing a subconscious memory.
You know there is genetic memory.
You may not remember how your great-great-great-grandfather looked like
but his nose is sitting on your face (Laughter).
A million years ago how your forefathers were,
even today your body remembers.
You may not remember here (Gestures)
but your body remembers every aspect of it.
Even the color of the skin it is remembering, not forgotten.
So there is genetic memory.
There is evolutionary memory.
Like this, there’s a profound dimension of memory in the body.
There are trillion times more memory in your body than in your mind.
So this is why this (Gestures) is called as manomayakosha.
This is an entire manas, not in one place.
Intellect may be up here (Gestures)
but the manas spreads right through the system.
Every cell in the body has a memory of its own,
has an intelligence of its own.
Now the fourth dimension of intelligence is called chitta.
This is a dimension of intelligence which is unsullied by memory.
If you touch this dimension,
then the memory has no influence on you.
Your genetic memory, your evolutionary memory,
your conscious memories, unconscious memory, subconscious memory,
whatever kinds of memories you have,
it has no influence on you.
Or in other words, past cannot recycle itself through you.
See, right now, you take on this form because of a certain memory.
It's a certain software.
Tch, if you eat… Let's say you’re a man and you eat a piece of bread,
this piece of bread turns into a man.
You are woman and you eat a piece of bread, the same piece of bread turns into a woman.
You give it to your dog, it turns into a dog.
Very intelligent bread (Laughter)!
It is just the memory that you carry.
Here (Gestures), there is a memory
which transforms everything the way it is.
So, this dimension of intelligence which is called as chitta,
which is untouched by any kind of memory,
just pure intelligence, is of significance
because it's beyond.
It is beyond your species,
it is beyond your form,
it’s beyond your gender,
it's beyond your culture,
it's beyond every kind of influence which is essentially memory within you.
May be unconscious,
but it is memory playing out in so many ways.
As long as memory is playing out,
what it means is,
you’re
In India, we say you are in a state of samsara.
Samsara means, lot of people today understand as family (Laughs).
Samsara doesn’t mean family.
Samsara means a cyclical life.
You are in cycles of life.
If you’re in cycles or if you’re going in circles,
what does it mean?
That means you’re not getting anywhere. That’s what it means.
A cycle is nice.
It gives you good exercise.
This is like running on a treadmill.
If you’re seeking exercise, it's good.
But if you want to go somewhere, it's no good.
If you put your treadmill out here and keep running on it,
morning becomes evening,
fall becomes winter,
winter becomes summer,
everything will happen.
Seasons will change,
scenery will change,
everything will happen.
Only thing is you don’t go anywhere.
This is what samsara means.
As long as you’re functioning within the first three dimensions of intelligence,
you’re in a cyclical mode.
It is all right to exercise yourself
but it’s not good to go somewhere.
So if you want to transcend the samsara nature of who you are
or the cyclical nature of your existence,
then you touch the dimension of intelligence which is referred to as chitta.
Why the so-called Eastern wisdom is of great significance?
Why the dharma of the East is so significant and important is
because this comes from chitta.
This does not come from buddhi,
this does not come from manas,
this does not come from ahankara.
This comes from chitta
and only that which does not come from your individual identity or individual memory,
that can be truly universal.
So for this, we said,
“This is sanathan dharm.”
This does not mean Hindu religion.
This is a very wrong conception.
Sanathan dharm means the ultimate law of nature.
When we say nature, there is physical nature and there is an inner nature.
There are two dimensions. For this,
accordingly we made two dimensions of laws.
Physical nature is a changing thing,
it's always in a process of change and a flux.
But the inner nature is a constant process.
So we made two dimensions of expression for this dharma
called shruthis and smrithis.
One is always to be updated for every generation,
otherwise two generations will keep on bickering and clashing (Laughs).
You have to update it.
Another is eternal,
it’s always there.
It's nobody’s business to change it
because it cannot be changed because the fundamentals of life has not changed.
Based on this, an entire wisdom arose
as to how to exist within you
and how to operate around you.
This happened in 1924.
There was a Bishop in the Orthodox Greek religion,
where… You know,
there is Orthodox Greek segment of Christians.
They have a Pope of their own in Istanbul.
They believe they are the only true Christians.
Others are all riffraff according to them.
So he served this particular segment, which is very orthodox and rigid.
Being in Istanbul,
being on the Silk Route,
all kinds of stories of Indian mysticism kept wafting across the Bosporus.
So, he has a longing to go to India
and see a real yogi or a mystic.
But being a man of cloth,
he could not choose where to go and where not to go.
After he passed sixty years of age,
when he semi-retired,
he got an opportunity and went to India
and came to southern India.
So his desire is to meet a real yogi,
not a book yogi,
not a studio yogi but a real one (Laughter).
So somebody directed him and said,
“Go up this hill. There in this kind of place, there will be one yogi.”
So he went up.
Well, he’s not made for the mountains.
He went huffing and puffing up and then he found in front of a small cave,
a yogi was sitting, eyes closed, totally blissed out.
He went there and
he has been told that if you see a Indian yogi,
you must prostrate.
Well, he was not made for that (Laughter)
but he somehow managed,
huffed and puffed and sat down.
Hearing this commotion,
the yogi opened his eyes and smiled.
Immediately, the bishop looked at him and said,
“Can I ask you a question?”
The yogi said, “By all means.”
The bishop asked, “What is life?”
This is after sixty (Laughter).
You should have asked this question when you were eight (Laughter),
at least when you’re sixteen (Laughs) –
sixty!
But what to do?
Better late than never (Laughs).
He asked.
Then the yogi laughed and went into raptures,
“Oh life!
Life is like the fragrance of jasmine upon gentle spring breeze” (Laughter).
The bishop looked at him and said,
“What!
Life is like fragrance of jasmine upon gentle spring breeze?
Our teacher told us,
‘Life is like a thorn (Laughter).
Once it gets into you (Laughter),
if you sit, it hurts,
if you stand, it hurts,
if you lie down, it hurts’ (Laughter).
What is this fragrance of jasmine upon gentle spring breeze?”
So the yogi smiled and said,
“Well, that’s his life” (Laughter).
So this comes from the fundamental that,
when a human being clearly, experientially understands
that entire experience of human life is created from within,
never from outside.
Right now, as you sit here, do you at least see me?
Even if you’re not listening to me, I’m saying (Laughter).
Can you use your hand and show where I am?
Ah, no, no, you’re getting it all wrong.
You know I’m a mystic from South India (Laughter)?
Now this light is falling upon me,
reflecting, going through your lenses,
inverted image in the retina, you know the whole story?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Where do you see me right now?
Within yourself.
Where do you hear me right now?
Within yourself.
Where have you seen the entire world?
Within yourself.
Have you ever experienced anything outside of yourself?
Right now, someone next to you, if they touch you,
you think you’re experiencing their hand.
No.
You’re only experiencing the sensations in your hand.
In the very nature of things,
you cannot experience anything outside of yourself.
When everything,
when the entire experience of life is caused from within you,
at least it must happen the way you want it, isn't it? Hmm?
The world will not happen the way you want it,
at least (Laughs) the experience of living here, within you,
must happen the way you want it.
If… If… If your experience of life happened just the way you want it,
how would you keep yourself?
Blissful or miserable?
Few Participants: Blissful.
Sadhguru: Please, you must tell me, I’m going to bless you (Laughter).
Blissful or miserable?
Participants: Blissful!
Sadhguru: For yourself – definitely, highest level of pleasantness for yourself.
What you want for your neighbor may be debatable (Laughter)
but you know what you want for yourself, isn't it?
Now, blissfulness or pleasantness of life is not a goal by itself.
It is only when you’re blissful by your own nature,
that means you determine the nature of your experience.
No matter what is the situation,
you determine the nature of your experience.
Or in other words, you have no fear of suffering.
Only and only when there is no fear of suffering,
will you walk full stride in this life,
otherwise it's always about
‘What will happen to me,
what will happen to me?’
Every step is a half a step.
Now, this so-called spirit of Eastern wisdom comes from those beings
who walked full stride,
who determined the nature of their experience.
The outside never decided who they are.
So, they could walk full stride and explore the depths and dimensions of life
that others never dared to touch
because most of the humanity is only concerned about
‘What will happen to me?’
‘What will happen to me’ means what?
‘Will I suffer?’ – that’s the question.
The first and foremost thing,
if you truly want to explore dimensions which we are referring to
as another dimension of wisdom or knowing, is
that first you must determine the nature of your experience.
You have no fear of suffering.
Only then, truly exploring human consciousness becomes a reality.
Touching dimensions of intelligence
which gives access to the entire universe becomes a possibility.
I’m supposed to open up for questions (Laughter).
It's time you ask your questions please.
Questioner: the population I work with
that are in the verge of homelessness or they are addicts
If I tell them that “It is your intellect,
and it's your perception,
and this doesn’t exist, they will laugh at me
because it definitely exists.
Sadhguru: They must because it's the dumbest thing to say (Laughter).
Questioner: Right.
So I wanted to know this spirituality that you teach,
the spirituality that many gurus teach,
how is it usable for someone that doesn’t have food to eat
and is going to become homeless
and there is so many problems,
especially in America.
I mean how
Of course I teach them resiliency, it's a different fact.
But every time I’m going to open my mouth and use some of your teachings,
I have to step back (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Now the first problem is that you believe in the teachings because
this is the problem with the entire world –
they have been cultured in some belief or the other.
This is what is significant about
what is referred to as sanathana dharma
or what is referred to as the Indian way of looking at things is,
this is not a land of belief systems,
this is a land of seekers.
Never ever were anybody encouraged to believe anything.
If you see anything that comes from that land,
you will see,
it is all about questions -
never about a belief system.
If you enter a Indian home,
in the same house,
five different people are worshiping twenty-five different gods and goddesses
(Laughter). They’re still not made up their minds
which is (Laughter
and they have no problem, they’ll never fight about it (Laughter)
because it's a land of seeking.
So first mistake you make is you believe what I say.
I am constantly reminding you,
“Don’t believe a goddamn thing that anybody says
but don’t be foolish enough to disbelieve it either.
All you have to do is experiment with it –
does it work or doesn’t work?
If it works, you keep it, otherwise rubbish it, what's the problem?
Now, about somebody being hungry,
somebody being homeless,
somebody being in a war zones –
all kinds of horrible things are happening on the planet.
I am not ignorant of it.
Anyway, you said living in a temple
I am not living in a temple.
I am more of the world than you are.
Every day (Laughs)
I want you to understand,
I’m running a volunteer organization
with over 4,000 full-time volunteers
and over three million part-time volunteers doing variety of work.
Huge projects,
over a dozen businesses
and the spiritual movement, okay (Few participants almost start clapping)?
Now, I want you to understand,
more things are going wrong with my life on a daily basis than anybody’s life (Laughter/Applause).
Now when a man is hungry
if you try to tell him,
“Your intellect is the source of your problem” (Laughter) –
it's obscene!
It's obscene,
it's nothing short of that.
I never spoke to hungry people and said,
“Your intellect is the source of the problem.”
I’m talking to people who’re bulging (Laughter) in so many ways.
In their head and in their body, they’re bulging (Laughter).
I’m only talking to that segment of the population.
Those who are not fed well,
I’m doing social projects with them,
with nourishment,
education,
health,
all for free.
Will I ever go and talk to a starved man in an Indian village
and tell him,
“Your intellect is the basis of all your problems” (Laughter).
What makes you think that I’m that stupid (Laughter)? I
Do I look like that (Laughs)?
So you also don’t do that (Laughter).
This is for you.
You need to understand this. There are million problems on the planet.
All these million problems are essentially because
those who are reasonably well have never cared to reach out and do
what needs to be done in the world.
In many ways, they’re making sure those people don’t get it.
Yes.
In the year 2012,
we have produced enough food for 18.2 billion people.
We had only 6.6 billion people in that year
but still, fifty percent of the population is malnourished
and hardly eaten anything.
This is not because there is no food.
Because
This is because you and me have not cared, isn't it?
So,
is it true?
Is it true nobody stabbed you in the last twenty-five years?
Yes.
But is it also true you’re suffering various things of tension, stress, anxiety, this, that?
Is it a product of your mind
or somebody else poking you from outside?
It is your reaction to the existential situation outside.
Instead of doing what is needed,
what you see is
when you see something wrong happening
or when you see some suffering
or something comes your way,
you decide to poke yourself.
This is about incapacitating yourself.
Instead of seeing when there is a problem,
you need empowerment,
not incapacitating yourself, isn't it?
I’m talking about empowering you
so that your damn intelligence functions for you,
not against you.
The moment your intelligence is working against you,
no god in the universe is going to help you
and can help you.
Yes.
If your intelligence has turned against you,
you are a finished case.
So I’m saying, first let your intelligence work for you.
If it works for you,
there are many miraculous things that you can do
for all those people who have still not eaten properly,
for whom basic things have not been taken care of.
That’s our business because
somehow we’ve landed in a place
where you and me are at least eating well.
Once we are in such a privilege,
we must use our intelligence to see what is the best thing we can do in the world,
not sit here and twist yourself out.
I’m saying don’t twist yourself out.
If you’re joyful,
naturally you will do the best things you can do.
If I meet you when you’re very happy,
will you be nice to me?
Participant: I’ll always be nice to you.
Sadhguru: No, no, no (Laughter).
I don’t believe that.
When you’re very happy, if I meet you, I’m sure you’re a wonderful person.
But when you’re depressed, when you’re unhappy, when you’re frustrated,
if I meet you, you could be a nasty person?
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: This is true with every human being, isn't it?
So the first and foremost work that any human being has to do is
that you make this (Referring to oneself) into a pleasant piece of life
so that you naturally exude this pleasantness in every possible way.
If this (Referring to oneself) is feeling unpleasant
and you tell this one to be pleasant,
is it going to work?
We are trying to fix the stomach full people right now (Laughter).
Questioner: It was a pleasure listening to you, unbelievable.
But my question is
what can I do so that I can acquire your skill of clarity,
honesty (Laughter)?
And honestly, generally speaking,
very few people, you know, are like you are.
I’m sure you have heard this before (Laughter).
So what makes you
What makes you so secure from within and be so candid,
honest,
truthful,
clarity of expression (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: I didn’t know that’s a popular question (Laughs).
When we say clarity,
that means… Tch (Few laugh)
I want to tell you a joke but it's
it's a dirty joke so I thought I’ll skip that one (Laughter).
Participant: Go for it!
Participants: Please tell.
Sadhguru: No, no, I’ll s… I’ll come with something milder, you know (Laughter)?
The problem with the human being right now, is this –
we have created a world
we have created education systems
where we believe that
human beings are essentially all wrong
or the creation is all wrong
or the source of creation or the creator is all wrong
and you’re going to fix it (Laughter).
This is a convoluted idea.
Instead of paying attention to life,
we are coming up with philosophies and philosophies and philosophies.
Philosophies are fantastic explanations to that which cannot be explained.
If you want to know life,
you must pay attention to life, isn't it?
Right now, do you agree with me, Madam,
that this human mechanism is the most sophisticated machine on the planet?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Do you agree with me?
Are you a doctor?
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: Yes (Laughs).
So, this (Referring to oneself) is such a complex machine.
This (Referring to oneself) is the super, super computer, all right?
I’m asking have you bothered to read the user’s manual (Laughter)?
If you understand how this (Referring to oneself) functions,
you would know how to use it.
Even if you take a simple gadget like a phone,
the more you know about it, the better you can use it.
Isn't it so?
You have definitely… Coming from India,
you have definitely been bombarded with this thing about
realization
self-realization.
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Let me put it in very simple terms.
What self-realization means is
First of all, what the word realization means –
realization is not an achievement,
it is not an accomplishment,
it is just realization.
That means something that’s always here,
you just managed to see it now.
That means you were stupid all your life (Laughter),
just now you saw it (Laughter).
You did not invent something new,
you did not ramp yourself up to a mountain.
No,
you just saw the most obvious thing which was always here –
you realized.
So,
realization means you realized how foolish you have been.
Everything has been right here
and you didn’t get it.
So there are many ways.
Of course, most of you being from the Indian origin,
I have not read this
I have to admit, I have never read the Gita (Laughs)
because it never occurred to me.
I’m sorry (Laughter),
I know this is a shock (Laughs).
But you know, be
living in India,
bits and pieces of this are always floating around in the air and it's
you know many pieces of it
but I’ve never really studied it in any sense.
So when… On a certain moment,
when Arjuna asked,
“What is the nature of this truth that you’re talking about?
Where is it?”
So Krishna laughed and said,
“The highest truth about your life is at the tip of your nose.”
Now there are many schools of yoga intensely focusing on the tips of their noses
(Laughter/Applause).
Please try it for two minutes, you will get a headache (Laughter).
You will not get enlightened (Laughter).
What he is saying is, it is the most obvious thing.
It is the most obvious thing
but right now, the problem is
all the instruments of perception that you have are outward bound
but the seat of your experience is within you.
The fundamental seat of your experience is within you
but all the instruments of perception are outward bound.
So how should I do this?
You must understand
anything beyond survival, if it has to enter your life,
some striving is needed.
Let's say,
as a little infant,
you were left in the jungle without human contact.
If something edible came in front of you,
would you first try your ears,
then nostrils,
and somehow by accident find your mouth?
Is that so?
You would just know where to put it, isn't it?
So what I’m saying is everything that is necessary for survival
is built into you.
It
You’re born with it.
The five senses takes care of it.
But if you want to know something more,
you have to strive.
For example,
do you remember,
when you were three, four or five years of age,
you had to learn to write the alphabet.
That damn ‘A’ how complicated it was
and they… on top it, there were two versions (Laughter).
You had to write it a hundred times to get it, isn't it?
But today, with your eyes closed,
you can write.
If that striving was not there,
today could you write?
Today would you know language?
So, anything beyond survival needs striving.
Without the needed striving, it won’t happen.
There are ways to perceive the interiority of who you are
but unfortunately, there’s been no striving.
Right now, we made this technology into such a simple,
almost like a physical science.
‘A’ plus ‘B’ equals this or
two parts of hydrogen, one part of oxygen,
water will come.
If a great scientist puts it together, only water will come.
An idiot puts it together, only water will come.
So we made the entire yoga sutras like this,
that if you do this, this, and this,
this will happen to you.
That simple and all I’m asking (Laughs) generally from people is
about thirty, thirty to thirty-two hours of focused time
to develop an instrument where they can turn inward.
“Ooof... Thirty hours is too much” (Few laugh).
I’m saying if you cannot dedicate
a little bit of time to know what this (Referring to oneself) is,
that means your existence must be truly worthless.
If this (Referring to oneself) is worthwhile,
you must pay attention to this (Referring to oneself), isn't it?
If you want to know life,
this (Referring to oneself) is life, isn't it?
When I say the word life,
maybe you’re thinking about your profession,
your family,
your car,
your home.
No,
these are all accessories.
This (Referring to oneself) is life. Isn't it so?
Hello?
Participants: Yes (Laughter).
Sadhguru: But no attention has been paid.
Your idea of fixing life is fixing all kinds of things.
This happened one day.
Shankaran Pillai was going home (Laughter).
No, I’m not done (Laughter/Applause).
Shankaran Pillai was going home.
It is 7:30 in the evening.
The rules at home –
the wife’s rules – are 8:00 he must be home.
It's only 7:30.
He thought, “There is still time.
Let me have a quick drink and go.”
He just stepped into the local bar.
He had a quick drink and a quick drink and a quick drink and a quick drink and a quick drink (Laughter).
Then he looked at the time (Gestures) (Laughter).
It said 2:00 AM.
Tch,
you know, drinking people are like yogis,
they become timeless (Laughter/Applause).
There’s a certain correlation (Laughter).
Then it's late and he got off the bar stool and tried to walk.
It's such an unfair world.
A man is supposed to walk on a round planet.
As if that’s not enough, it spins (Laughter)!
You notice that the planet is round and it's spinning
only when you’ve had a few drops more
or a few drops are missing between your two ears (Laughs).
Either you’re drunk or you have a vertigo,
then you notice the planet is round and spinning.
Otherwise you think it's flat and you’re going on fine (Laughs).
So with great difficulty, he was walking sideways
and trying to find his way home.
He was crossing a garden and he flipped over
and fell face down into a rose bush.
His face became a mess.
Then he somehow reached home and you know,
these keyholes are so minute.
It took twenty minutes to find the keyhole.
Then he found his way up to the bedroom
and then he went into the bathroom
and he looked at his face.
It was a real mess.
Then he opened the medicine cabinet,
took out medicine,
plaster,
Band Aid,
fixed himself up and slowly crawled into the bed.
Fortunately, the wife is a big sleeper (Laughter).
He slept.
Morning eight o’clock,
the wife (Laughter)
took a bucketful of cold water and splashed it on him.
“Aahh (Gasps)…” –
water boarded, he woke up.
He said, “Why, why, it's only a Sunday?”
She said,
“You fool, again drinking.” She’s
He said, “Honey, six months ago, I promised you.
Since then, I haven’t touched a drop.”
She grabbed him by the shirt
and took him into the bathroom and showed him –
all the plaster was on the mirror (Laughter).
Why
Why people have lost their clarity (Laughter)
Why people have lost their clarity is only because of this –
that if there is any suffering here (Referring to oneself),
they think this one (Gestures towards someone else) should be fixed (Laughter).
If something else happens, that one should be fixed.
If something else happens, that one should be fixed (Laughter).
Every day morning prayer means what?
Trying to fix the god (Laughter).
Yes.
You’re trying to fix up the god, isn't it?
So day in and day out,
for everything that happens within you,
instead of fixing this one (Referring to oneself),
you’re trying to fix everything around you.
No wonder you will be confused
We’ve fixed the planet sufficiently,
at least in this part of the world.
If you fix it any more, there’ll be no planet left.
But are people bursting with ecstasy?
No.
So because
Clarity has been lost simply because of this.
If you understand,
if life has to really become beautiful for you,
this one (Referring to oneself) has to be fixed.
If you understand this one thing,
clarity will dawn within you (Applause).
Questioner: I actually have a question on chitta.
How can we tap into chitta, which is
what you said,
memory with no effect and the ability to break the cycles?
Sadhguru: Right here, you want to do that (Laughter)?
You can
You can take one fundamental step today,
that is I want you to
anyway you’re… you’ve already written down the question also.
You have the habit of writing things.
So you just sit down today before you go to bed,
write down what are all the different types of identities
that you have taken –
starting from your body,
everything else.
Just write it down and see
if you can create a little distance from these identifications.
Just work on that.
That’s the first step,
that you are not identified with anything.
You’re just here,
throbbing as a piece of life,
not as this or that.
See
“But what can I do, I am a young woman?”
Right now, yes,
when you sit here among people.
If you’re just walking by yourself in the garden,
you don’t really think you’re a young woman.
Or if you are that identified,
you can't help it even there,
if you just doze off a little bit,
you don’t sleep as a young woman,
you just sleep simply as life, isn't it?
I’m saying something so fundamental as your body and gender,
even that identity is only on the surface.
Your caste, creed, religion, race –
this is even more on the surface.
So I’m saying,
you can't do it in the day right now but before you go to bed,
see if you can keep all your identities by the bedside table and sleep.
Hmm?
To work in the world, you need an identity.
Without identity, you cannot function in the world.
So before going to sleep,
take off all the identities,
keep it on your bedside table –
morning it’ll be there, it’ll not go anywhere –
leave it there and go to sleep.
You have started the journey.
Questioner: I would like to hear Guruji’s turning point in life,
where he separated himself from his intellect
and his inner self.
Sadhguru: Do I look like someone who lost my intellect
(Laughter/Applause)?
I didn’t think that I was coming out so dumb
(Laughter).
This is… She’s asking for a story.
Do you want a story?
Participants: Yes (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: Okay (Laughs).
one must understand
it's a process that you set forth.
Tch, this started happening to me when I was just
around four, four-and-a-half years of age.
I suddenly realized one day that I don’t know anything.
I don’t know anything means
I don’t know anything at all.
To such an extent,
if somebody gives me a glass of water,
I would not know what is water.
I know if I drink this water, it’ll quench my thirst
and different ways of using it,
I know what to do with it but I don’t know what it is.
Well, actually if you look at it,
even today you don’t know what it is.
It’s the only substance present in the planet in all three different states.
Three fourths of the planet is water.
Nearly three fourths of your body is water.
If you’re looking for life, you look for a drop of water.
There’s lot of excitement, they found a few drops on the Mars (Few laugh).
I think people from California need to migrate (Laughter/Applause).
So, I’m just staring at this glass of water for hours on end.
If I found a dry leaf, I’m just looking at the leaf for five, six hours at a stretch.
If I sit up in my bed staring at the darkness,
the entire night I’m sitting like this, staring.
My dear father, being a physician,
started thinking I need psychiatric evaluation (Laughter).
“This boy is simply staring at something or the other,
unblinking he’s staring,
he’s lost it” (Few laugh).
My problem is I look at this one,
I still do not know this one.
There is no way I’m able to shift my attention to another one.
So I
It just held my attention, I couldn’t shift.
In this condition, they sent me to school (Few laugh)
and my mother said,
“Pay attention to the teachers.”
I went and paid attention to the teachers (Laughter) –
the kind of attention that they have never received in their life (Laughter).
And initially, I understood the words that they were speaking
and what they were trying to say.
After some time, I realized they’re just making sounds,
I’m making up the meanings in my head.
Even now, as I speak, I’m only making sounds,
you’re making up the meanings, isn't it?
Because language is a conspiracy between two people (Few laugh).
If you have a conspiracy, what do you do?
The Indians, you speak in your language (Laughter).
In India, we have this advantage.
We have 1,300 languages in the country.
We can have lots of conspiracies going (Laughs)
because we’ll speak in our own language.
Actually, I’m only makings sounds, isn't it?
You’re making up the meanings.
So when I realized I’m the one who making up all the meanings,
I stopped making the meanings.
Then I just heard the sounds with full attention.
See, this is the problem with most people.
The moment they don’t understand they think they need not pay attention.
What you do not understand needs more attention
than what you understand, isn't it
So, as I watched teacher after teacher coming in and making noises and noises and noises and going,
it became very amusing to me and a huge smile spread on my face.
They were not at all amused (Laughter).
My schooling went like this,
very consistent (Laughs),
because I remember this so well.
I don’t know if you still have this
You still have those monthly tests and report cards that your parents have to sign
and your… you know,
your children have to get it to you, stuff like that?
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: So, monthly report cards come. I see in the school,
some children are strutting around because they are first or second,
some are sitting and crying because they’re afraid to go home with their marks card.
Never once in my entire school life did I ever open and see (Laughter).
The teachers gave me the card, I took and gave it to my father.
I thought this’s a transaction between the two of them (Laughter).
I had nothing to do with this
because I was very consistent.
I always got six zeros (Laughter)
because I always gave an empty paper.
If they insisted, I put my name on it,
otherwise I gave an empty paper, as a rule.
When the final exam came, I wrote something and went to the next class,
otherwise all my tests I got zero, zero, zero, zero
because
million things, you know?
I have a billion questions in my mind about everything.
There is nobody around who is capable of answering these questions
but they’re trying to stuff something else into you
which I’m not interested in.
So, school went like this.
This’s about eight years ago. This school
where I studied nearly forty – forty-five years ago,
they came to invite me for their one hundred and twenty-fifth anniversary of the school (Few laugh).
So the trustees –
the third generation of trustees – came to invite me.
They said, “You must come.”
I said, “See, I was not just a ‘not good’ student (Laughter),
I was not even a student, why me, you know?
You call the brilliant students of your school.
Why me?”
They said (Laughs), “You know, our school has produced Union Ministers.
Our school has produced cricketing stars.
Our school has produced film stars.
You are the only mystic, you must come” (Laughter).
I said, “Okay” (Laughs).
So I went there to speak and (Laughs)
and I went and stood up in the quadrangle, looked around –
the same oppressive buildings (Few laugh).
Then I suddenly remembered this classroom.
I was about thirteen years of age.
One afternoon,
the teacher is trying to get a response for some question he’s asked.
I hear the sounds but I don’t hear the words.
After some time, I don’t even hear the sounds,
I don’t even see their forms,
I just see all kinds of things.
I know their past, present, and future
but I don’t know what he’s saying (Laughs).
I know his entire life better than him
but I don’t know what he is saying.
And thirty-five, forty minutes,
he desperately tried to get a response from me.
But those days, I am made like this –
sometimes three days, four days I don’t utter a word
not because I am in silence or something.
When you don’t know anything, what do you say?
This ‘I do not know anything’ has grown to such a size,
it's like, you know,
my mind is billions of questions, simply.
I have a question mark about everything in the universe
and not a single answer (Laughs).
So, then after thirty-five, forty minutes, he got so frustrated.
He came and held me by the shoulders, shook me violently like this (Gestures)
and he said,
“You must either be the divine or the devil.
I think you are the latter
I did not feel abused by this or insulted by this.
Till then, my problem was –
what is this,
what is that,
what is that,
what is that,
what is that?
One thing was clear to me – this (Referring to oneself) is me.
Suddenly this guy confused me about this also (Laughter).
Suddenly I looked like this (Gestures) –
what am I?
Am I divine?
Am I devil?
What the hell am I (Laughter)?
He just confused me for the first time.
I thought this was clear (Laughter).
So I tried to stare at myself.
It didn’t work,
so I closed my eyes. Initially, minutes to hours it went on.
One day, I closed my eyes and sat.
I thought I sat there for twenty-five, thirty minutes.
When I opened my eyes,
there’s a huge crowd around me.
India being what it is, there’re garlands around me… around my neck,
people are pulling my legs (Few laugh).
They want to know we
Somebody wants to know about his business,
somebody wants to know when his daughters will get married (Laughter).
I said,
“What the hell?
Where did you all come from?”
They said, “You’ve been sitting here for thirteen days.”
In my experience, it was only twenty-five, thirty minutes.
When I tried to open my legs, my knees were stuck.
It took almost an hour-and-a-half,
putting hot water,
massage,
everything to get my legs straightened out,
otherwise even I wouldn’t have believed it but thirteen days had passed.
In my experience, it just felt like twenty-five, thirty minutes.
And suddenly what is inside, what is outside, everything got mixed up.
Clearly till then, I was very clear, this is me, that’s you, all right?
I had no issue with that one but this is me and that is you.
Suddenly I… this idea of what is me and what is not me got all mixed up
because what is me was just everywhere.
Now, this looks like a hallucination and that’s what I thought.
I thought I’m just losing… you know, going off my rocker,
I’m just losing my mind.
But every cell in my body is bursting with ecstasy.
One thing I know is I don’t want to lose it.
It may be madness but I don’t want to lose it.
So right now, my whole effort with life is to just rub off that madness on you
(Laughter/Applause).
You should also know the ecstasy of being alive.
Right now, you know the torture of your intellect.
You must know the ecstasy of being alive.
You are a piece of life,
rest is all arrangements.
Yes or no?
Why did you make these arrangements?
To enhance your life.
no, no, you made these arrangements mainly to enhance this life.
You thought with education, your life would enhance itself,
with money, it would enhance itself,
with marriage, it would enhance itself,
with children, it would enhance itself.
Now you started the question, you know,
this… I wanted to come and meditate but my family, my children, dadada,
as if it's a problem.
These are accessories that you added to enhance your life,
not to put your life down.
Yes?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Every arrangement that you made is about enhancing this life (Referring to oneself), isn't it?
If this life (Referring to oneself) could be enhanced from outside,
you would have done it.
But this is a realization for you that life cannot be enhanced from outside.
Arrangements will bring convenience and comfort.
It’ll take care of things for us, around us,
but it cannot enhance.
If you want to enhance the… life, you have to turn inward.
If you really care for people who are with you –
your family, your children –
the foremost thing that you need to do is
you have to enhance this (Referring to oneself)
because what is the damn best thing that you can do to people around you?
That you are a wonderful human being.
There is nothing better you can do to them.
If you had a choice either to live or work with joyful and blissful human beings or
work and live with miserable human beings,
what is your choice?
Participants: Blissful.
Sadhguru: Blissful.
I want you to please, please, please remember
everybody else is looking forward to the same thing (Laughter).
You think other people want miserable people?
No.
Please just give them that much that you’re a joyful human being (Laughs).
Thank you very much
I would like to… I would like to once again acknowledge the Dharma Foundation
for the commendable cause that they have taken up.
This will be an important step
for preserving and nurturing the future generations in a certain way.
The significance of this is not to spread another new religion.
The significance of this –
to create a a-religious world
but still deeply spiritual world.
This is very important.
This is very, very important.
The divide of religions, you see what it is causing.
In the past, it has done terrible things.
Still samples of that happening in many parts of the world,
what the religious divide can do.
Don’t think you will be or I will be or our children will be immune to this
. Anywhere it can flare up, believe me, anywhere.
So this effort is commendable
and in whichever way we can support this,
Isha Foundation and myself, we will
put our force behind this.
Thank you very much for being here (Applause).
Kiran Bedi: When you analyze the making of a nation,
its making of an organization
making of a nation,
one of the first few things we do is a SWOT analysis.
We do strengths,
we do weaknesses,
we do opportunities
and we do threats.
Any making of an organization or a nation.
I thought let me put across to you
what is the SWOT analysis of making of a nation, let’s say Bharat, India.
What are the strengths of India,
what are the weaknesses of India,
what are the opportunities we have
and what are the threats we need to
Let's first look at the strengths of India.
Sadhguru: I would bring it down further to an individual.
What is needed to build a successful individual,
the same things are needed to build a successful nation,
it’s not any different
Sadhguru: If one knows how to build a successful human being of himself in every way
when I say successful, not that just you made money,
not just that you get a ranking,
not that you just got elected,
no.
A successful human being means in every way you’re complete.
If you make this, you… the same replica is for the nation, in the sense
if want to be a good human being to start with
all your four limbs should be limbered up and nice, strong and fine.
The four limbs of a nation is just this
the executive, the judiciary, the military and the civil services
all of them must be limbered up and agile.
We must do some yoga with all of them. We must knead them.
They have all become,
you know if you can't fold your elbow, your elbow stuck here,
your this thing is stuck here – these are useless limbs.
When you have pain in your limbs, you’ll wish you did not have those limbs, isn’t it?
That’s what is happening right now.
We wish we did not have them many times because they’ve become such a pain.
So keeping them limbered up,
these four limbs is very important
See, always a nation will be successful only when
people’s aspirations are kept alive.
If people lose their aspiration, it's a finished nation, okay.
There must be enormous aspiration and people should see a piece of the sky.
They must see it's a possibility, it is not an empty dream.
If it becomes an empty dream they’ll go to hallucinogenic drugs.
They must see a piece of the sky that it's worth making the effort always.
So to nurture an aspiration and to create the possibility that
within your lifespan you can get there is very important
and also make people’s aspirations into national aspiration
and nation’s aspiration into people’s aspiration.
And a strategic sense as to where we are,
is not living in a utopian idea of well-being,
which we have done unfortunately
having a strategic sense of where we are,
what are the things to make a nation happen?
For example: when we made the nation
this is not a commentary on some mistakes that people might have done
because in retrospect we can say many things.
In those times they did what… I believe they did whatever they thought was best.
For example we have been trading with the rest of the world for over ten thousand years.
If you go to Syria – in many parts of Arabia,
particularly Syria, unfortunately it's in such a mess.
I wanted to do this Indian trading route,
the Indian traders how they travelled,
so I drove through Syrian Desert myself and we went.
It was a fantastic thing, experience.
Wherever you go stories of Indian traders, eight thousand years ago –
the Aleppo City, which is completely in rubble right now
one of the most beautiful cities was built only on the taxes that the Indian traders paid, okay?
Everywhere… in the Syrian schools they’re studying about
how Indian traders and engineers and all kinds of people coming
eight – ten thousand years ago.
Is there any such story in India?
Sadhguru: Do you know?
No Indian child ever reads about it.
Kiran Bedi: Yes.
Sadhguru: You go to Lebanon
there’s a place called Baalbek
which is a 4300 year old Phoenician temple.
Every child in fifth, sixth standard in Lebanon in school,
they all study that
Indian builders, Indian sculptures, Indian elephants, Indian labor and Indian yogis came and built this.
A huge massive temple,
each stone …some of the foundation stones weighing three hundred tones.
They transported it up the mountain and built this,
Indian engineers of that time. We have lotus flowers hanging from the ceiling.
Obviously there’re no lotuses in Lebanon,
it was sculptured by the Indian sculptures.
Every Lebanese child knows this.
Does any Indian child
any of the Indians, have they heard about it? No
Over a thousand years ago Tamil kings went to Angkor Wat and Angkor Thom.
If any of you… most …many of you might have seen this
you will feel proud of being human if you see the works that’s been done.
It's the largest religious building on the planet, Angkor Thom.
Does any Tamil child in Tamil Nadu up to twelfth standard read a line about it in his textbook? No.
When you don’t build pride,
how do you build a nation?
If you do not build pride,
you cannot build a nation.
If you are not proud of who you are
why the hell should you stay here?
Right now if the more advanced countries,
western countries open up their visa policy,
eighty percent of the Indians will swim across the oceans and go away
That means… if eighty percent of the people want to go away
and you’re holding them by force, it's a prison.
You know about prisons
We’re holding them.
No, people should want to be here,
everybody wants to go away and we are holding them.
That’s not the way to run a nation.
Kiran Bedi: So is that your main weakness from strength?
Strength is healthy people, inspired people.
Is your weakness is un
Sadhguru: Yes. It is a serious weakness in the country.
Kiran Bedi: Rootless people.
You’re talking about people who have no roots.
They don’t understand their roots, they don’t understand their history,
they don’t understand their culture.
Sadhguru …it is not that… no, they are not rootless people, they have root.
They know their roots but they’re little ashamed of their roots,
they’re hiding their roots and they’re all wearing denim pants just to hide their roots
Kiran Bedi: Sadhguru, they don’t know the roots.
Sadhguru, this is a fact they don't know the roots.
Sadhguru: They may not
Kiran Bedi: No, no in our schools which we run,
in our schools which we run, many of that ninth standard,
tenth standard coming from different kinds of schools.
Primarily government funded schools.
First thing which one of my director… teacher said
“Can you write an essay on Mahatma Gandhi?”
Sadhguru, you’ll be shocked to hear
I am talking only of Gandhiji –
the essay… the question was what is
what is the name of the wife of Mahatma Gandhi?
Do you know one of them wrote
can you guess?
I don’t even want to mention the name
Sadhguru: Don’t tell me.
Kiran Bedi: So Sadhguru, you can goad just now
what's wrong with our… so that’s our weakness you are talking about, it’s rootless.
Sadhguru: I…I would like to repeat this. We are not rootless
but people who occupied us for so long
somehow managed to bring a certain sense of shame about our roots
which is… which has to go.
See, Mahatma Gandhi is part of a movement,
which is not even history,
which I would call it present, okay?
It is just the backend of our present stage.
He is not really history that way.
He is still so close to us in time, I’ll say.
all I am saying is tch, this is… picking up names, this-that is different
but everybody knows Mahatma Gandhi’s face
and everybody knows he was important for our nation,
that much even a village child knows it,
which is I feel all right.
But I am talking about a much deeper thing,
that is as a land,
as a people
what are we good at?
Have we been good at something?
No.
We’ve been only occupied for thousand years;
we’ve been looted, we’ve been raped, we’ve been robbed
this is only we’ve done.
We’ve done nothing that’s worthwhile.
That’s not good.
We have to educate our children to show
that we have done tremendous things.
Just two hundred and fifty years ago we were the largest economy.
Whole of Europe was thirsting to come to India
and even, you know wherever they went, they called people Indians.
Whether they went to North America or wherever
because they were all aspiring to come to this place
because it was the wealthiest nation,
it was the most knowledgeable country,
it was the best place to be.
Everybody wanted to be here.
Kiran Bedi: Who teaches them?
Who teaches these youngsters?
Sadhguru: These things have not been taught
because our history has been written by
Kiran Bedi: Who is at fault?
Sadhguru: Because our books are written by the English. Okay?
History is written like this to dominate you.
Kiran Bedi: No, but it’s NCERT.
It is no more English writers,
it is Indian writers.
You bring yoga in.
Sadhguru: But your brains are in Greenwich Mean Time.
You ask anybody –
I see on the news channels,
in…among the ministers everybody talking
“Okay I was in Cambridge in this year, where were you?”
“I was in Oxford.
Only now I am seeing people who studied locally seem to be somewhere
You will see this is the pride
“Okay I went to Cambridge where did you go?”
“Oh I was in Oxford.”
Okay?
Recently… I will tell how it is.
I was in Hyderabad, a journalist wants to interview me
and she is telling me a piece of information
it seems the Sheffield University in UK made a study on the vibrations of the sun
and they measured these vibrations,
they are exactly the same vibrations which will happen when you utter the sound AUM.
She said, “Sadhguru, you must say this.”
I said, “I will not say this.
I am not going to say this.
I’ve been telling you for thirty years
many yogis and mystics have been telling you for thousands of years
and it’s not valuable,
Sheffield University tells you it's valuable,
I am not going to… I don’t need authentication.” (Applause)
It works for me.
You just look at me, it's worked hundred percent, okay?
It's worked.
Everything that we do,
the sciences of this nation,
the essential aspect of what this Samskriti is
has worked brilliantly well for us for thousands of years
and we know it works,
we don’t need any authentication
but right now we have created a world,
unless it's authenticated by the West
even the yoga that you’re doing here is only rebound from the American coast.
People (Laughs)
people think yoga was invented by Madonna
Kiran Bedi: I recall in the prison assignment
when I brought in yoga as a part of the day’s regime
many persons of certain communities or certain people didn’t want to do it.
They thought it is linked with a particular faith.
Till their own teachers came and explained to them
that this is for your larger good, it's mind, body, soul in harmony.
How do you dispel this?
Sadhguru: See, this is what I want to tell you.
For thousands of years we’ve been the biggest traders,
okay,
from this country.
The largest exports were from India for almost many thousands of years.
Nobody ever thought of exporting in such large quantities.
So both with goods and gods, we’ve been very good, okay?
We can export both,
we don’t have to import either
We’re very good both with goods and gods.
Our ability to create goods was systematically broken,
our industry was broken,
our business systems were broken.
It's all right,
I am not complaining, let it happen because
we let it happen because we did not take care of one of the limbs.
There was no military wing.
Kiran Bedi: Military wing?
Sadhguru: Yeah when invaders came
you could not defend your people because...
Kiran Bedi: That’s right.
Sadhguru: …you were singing music,
you were meditating,
you were doing things (Laughs).
Kiran Bedi: Exactly, yes.
Sadhguru: Nice, you were in mathematics,
you were in astronomy,
you were all this.
Kiran Bedi: You were not united either.
You were not united,
there were so many, they were fighting each other.
Sadhguru: That is also there
but I’m saying essentially you didn’t have the martial power to defend yourself.
Kiran Bedi: Correct.
(Sadhguru): To progress in one’s path
simply means that you have an expanded sense of ignorance.
Once it happened,
a man was trying to carry a grandfather clock,
from a truck, to his house, on his back, a huge one.
A drunk came by and said,
‘Hey mister,
you just take my advise,
get yourself a wristwatch.’
If all you are looking for is dividing the day into 24 hours,
all you need is a wristwatch;
but if that doesn’t hold much meaning to you
if that process of dividing life into proper compartments and living
doesn’t mean much to you anymore,
you want to know the timelessness of life,
the boundless nature of what this is,
then you need to be little bit set on fire.
Simply,
very nice logic
or petty emotions won’t do it.
They are nice,
they organize your life,
they make your life clean,
and acceptable,
but it doesn’t magnify
the possibility of moving from
a limited state of ignorance
to an unlimited state of ignorance.
Today modern scientists are coming to this point,
all these years they believed
someday we will know what is the nature of the existence.
Today lot of top level physicist are coming to this point
where they are beginning to talk in terms of we will never know,
we will just go on expanding the borders of our ignorance
but we will never know.
This is what mysticism meant.
This is what a mystic means,
an utterly ignorant person.
Everybody else is little bit ignorant,
little bit knowledgeable,
they know some things
they don’t know some things.
Someone who doesn’t know anything,
anything at all,
who is not burdened by knowledge,
because knowledge is an accumulation.
Someone who is simply not burdened by any kind of accumulation,
he is a mystic,
because he’s chosen to be utterly,
absolutely ignorant, not in parts.
So better to move from
moving from a wristwatch to a grandfather clock
is not a comfortable thing,
not at all comfortable.
If you are carrying a grandfather clock on your back,
it may have great value,
but you can’t even look at the time,
you have to ask somebody,
‘please look at the time and tell me, what’s the time?’
Aren’t you slowly becoming like this these days?
How am I?
I hear lot of people coming up to me and ask me,
‘Sadhguru, how am I?’
It’s alright,
sensible people ask, ‘How are you?’
Those who are becoming,
slowly moving towards larger dimensions of ignorance
are beginning to ask, ‘Sadhguru, how am I?’
If you are not multidimensional,
life will never be fulfilling.
At the end of your life,
you will wonder what the hell have you done with it.
It's better you wonder now.
Prathap Reddy:. I know it’s in everybody’s mind here,
you know. We all want to do so many things in each one of our sectors.
We would like to produce another hundred films
and each one of us would like to do saying this so much impossibility
and we think that we’ve done all of these
and somewhere along the line we feel that satisfaction
without really achieving our total objective
India is facing with this tremendous
you know there are three gold medals which we don’t want.
India is the diabetic capital of the world,
it’s the heart capital of the world,
it’s going to become the cancer capital of the world.
We don’t want these gold medals.
If I can I would like to put it in Bay of Bengal.
How do we… we get this
you know each one in their profession how do they get this
as you just says it’s all in us as humans,
but we want to think that we can only be super human to achieve this.
Sadhguru: The immensity of being human,
if suppose I can take a banana in my hand
and turn it into a human being
who would you think I am?
Prathap Reddy: The Creator.
Sadhguru: Must be …the Creator himself, isn’t it?
Isn’t that happening in every human being?
because… what our body is just accumulation of the food that we’ve eaten.
So there is an intelligence here, there is a competence here,
which can turn a piece of bread into a human being.
So when the source of Creation is throbbing within you,
what are you looking up or down?
When the very source of Creation is throbbing within you,
where are you looking for help?
There is no better place.So whatever work one maybe doing,
it does not matter what area of life we have chosen to participate in,
everything that we do can be transformative
both for yourself and everybody around you.
I am saying it is not even about finding satisfaction with your work,
doing something is not towards
at least what I do is not towards my satisfaction
because if I close my eyes and sit here I’m ecstatic, not just satisfied.
So I don’t have to do something in the world to be satisfied or to be happy.
It is just that there are things that need to be done in the world
which have not been done unfortunately.
Particularly in our country, so many things that we should do, have not been done.
So in our lives if we do not do what we cannot do, that’s not a problem.
But in our lives if we do not do what we can do,
we are a disastrous life.
My effort is to see that nobody turns into a disaster.
That everybody does what he can do in his life.
Prathap Reddy:Guruji, I must say, you’ve been abroad,
and have traveled so many days and you landed here yesterday.
If we had done this, all of us would have jetlag,
‘Let me take a day off, let me take two days off.’
Here you are, you know,coming with, you know,
something phenomenal which we now try to understand,
saying this is the capacity that you’ve brought in
and bringing this change
and since you’re talking worldwide, you know,
you have an impact wanting to change the world and
bring that better environment all over
I hope that formula is there prescription for that
because you have that extraordinary capacity of expression,
extraordinary perception (Sadhguru Laughs) and to be able to express.
Sadhguru: my… my mission is to make this ordinary.
It’s extraordinary because
lot of people have denied themselves the possibility of knowing the immensity of being human.
This is not about being super-human,
this is about realizing that being human is super.
So if every human being realizes what it means to be human,
I would not be extraordinary. I want to be normal.
I want to live in a world where I will be perceived as normal,
not as extra…Extraordinary is also another word for ‘He is a freako.’ Isn’t it? (Laughs)
somebody can say, ‘He is a freako, he is a freak happening.’
I am not a freak happening.
Every human being is capable of this,
it is just that they are identifying with their limitations,
they are not identifying with the possibility of the immensity of being human,
where
They are always referring to human as a limitation,
as a compulsion,
not as a liberation
If you are moving towards liberation,
you will experience many levels of freedom
Right now, what you call as ‘myself’
for most human beings is a bundle of compulsions,
that they can only be like this,
they can only do this,
they can only do that,
any number of limitations.
Unfortunately they are beginning to decorate their limitations which is a –
’This is how I am,’ you know. (Laughs)
This is not how you are, as a human being you can be any way you want,
this is the freedom that nature has giving you.
If you were born as a dog or a cat or a tiger or an elephant, that is how you are.
Once you are human
you can be any way you want.
This is the beauty of being human.
See, let’s say a tiger is born,
a tiger is not sitting and worrying itself how to be a good tiger. (Laughter
If it just eats well, it will become a good tiger.
It just has to find food.
It is never feeling insecure about its tiger-ness.
It is never worried, ‘Will I become a tiger?
Will I end up as a house cat?’ (Laughter)
There is no such struggles.
But you’re born as a human being,
how many things you have to do to become a good human being?
After doing all that, you don’t know where you belong still.
In comparison to somebody you think,
‘Okay, compared to this man I am better,’
but by yourself you don’t know where you stand.
You think you’re doing great,
your teenage son or daughter comes up and tells you, you’re no good.
what is human is only one end fixed, the other end wide open,
in terms of human consciousness.
Recently I was talking to a very top level microbiologist
and he said,
‘Sadhguru, what you are saying is so uncanny,
because if you look at the human cell
compared to any other cell of any other creature human cell is somehow open ended.’
So your very cells are open ended,
you can do things with it,
with your own body, which other
other human beings will think is super human.
It is not super human,
it is the possibility of being human,
which needs to be explored.
Unfortunately, not much has been done on this sphere.
Prathap Reddy: It’s a very wonderful thing.
I think most of us feel we have reached our limitation.
Sadhguru: No you have not. (Laughs)
Prathap Reddy: The way you put it beautifully
I know when I started
you know thought of this, doing this health care,
they called me crazy, you can’t do this.
It’s not a challenge but that confidence says I…we can.
I think can we have a mantra or meditation, something like that?
A medicine for that (Sadhguru Laughs)
so that all of us continuously say, ‘Yes I can, I will do many more things.’
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no. No, no, no.
I wouldn’t like to build confidence in people,
because confidence is a dangerous thing.
I am not trying to play with words.
I… I want you to, I mean, understand this aspect.
See what is needed for humanity is clarity of perception.
Where clarity is missing,
people try to substitute confidence for clarity.
Confidence without clarity is a disasterous thing.
Suppose you want to cross the street,
if your vision is clear,
you see things clearly and cross,
but if you’re very confident
there’re lot of people on the street who are very confident (Laughter),
they simply cross.
They’re surviving because of
by sheer chance or because of the compassion of the drivers. (Laughter)
So what we need in the world is not confidence,
we need clarity.
This is one thing that our education systems have completely failed to address
how to enhance human perception.
because only what you perceive you know, rest is just imagination, isn’t it?
So I am confident about something means,
I don’t know what it is but I am just going to do it and it may work.
If on a busy highway,
if you just… whatever your favorite slogan is –
‘Jai Sri Ram’ or ‘Hail Mary’ or ‘Allah hu Akbar’
you shout and run across the highway,
you may make it. (Laughter)
Prathap Reddy: God save us.
Sadhguru: Because just by sheer chance you may make it or
as I said, the… the drivers may be little compassionate.
But if you try every day, we know where to pick you up. (Laughter)
So what we need is not confidence, we need clarity in the world,
enhancing your perception is what is needed.
If you are able to perceive something that other people could not see,
that iswhat makes you an entrepreneur,
that is what makes you a leader,
that is what makes… gives you the necessary edge in the world.
So perception… enhancing perception is the whole dimension of yoga.
When I utter the word ‘yoga’,
because today, most of the yoga that people have known in this country
also unfortunately is rebound from the American coast.
Yes, very unfortunate.
Lot of people are beginning to think yoga was invented by Madonna. (Laughter)
This is the science of perception.
With these two eyes you can only perceive the physicality of what is here.
The physicality of who you are, is just a piece of the planet, isn’t it?
We are not going to know you by
Every day as doctors in your hospital must be reading somebody’s heart,
but you don’t know what’s beating in their heart.
You know whether they’re going to live or die (Laughs),
but you don’t know who they are, isn’t it?
What they are as a human being?
The complexity of their humanity is not there in their liver or kidney or heart or anything;
only their physical structure is there.
This is just a piece of the planet that you have gathered.
So who you are is much more than that,
that perception is beyond physicality.
So developing your perception to a dimension beyond physical is what is needed.
That is when you will produce human beings who look like gods.
They’re not gods;
they’re full-fledged human beings.
Because others have not strived to do that to themselves,
when they look at somebody who has flowered to a certain level of competence and capability,
they think either they are gods or
gods are favoring them.
It is not the truth of success in life.
Somebody is successful because he’s perceived something that others missed.
Prathap Reddy: It’s so wonderful Sadhguruji;
you know I know everyone in the beautiful auditorium here
and there’re thousands of people who are watching live on the internet,
they all want to know if there a prescription for good health (Laughs),
spirituality, yoga meditation. (Laughs).
Because I have seen, you know,
some of the impossible things that you have done for other people
when they were not well.
But more importantly when your health took bad,
no doctor and no medical dictionary or directory could ever detect it.
I read in the book. Arundhathi beautifully wrote in your biography,
she said you are a mystic,
you know, to have, have an undiagnosed illness for… and then got it cured.
So is there something to stay well?
Sadhguru: The thing is we created this body from inside.
So the manufacturer of this body is inside.
So if you have a repair job to be done,
would you like to go to the manufacturer or to the local mechanic? (Laughter/Applause)
If you had access, if you had access you would like to go to the manufacturer;
if you’ve lost access, you will go the local tinker to do this and that.
I am not trying to belittle medical science by saying this.
If there was no medical science as it is,
I would say even half the people would be dead by now,
here in this audience.
Yes,
because the average life expectancy of an Indian in 1947 was twenty eight years.
Today it has risen to sixty four,
one important factor is medical science the way it is.
So I am not trying to belittle or make fun of medical sciences.
It is very significant;
what has been achieved in the last thirty to forty years is phenomenal.
The question is just this –
if you had access to the source of that which creates this body,
definitely every problem that you generate within the body could be handled
Now there are two kinds of ailments –
infectious and chronic.
Infectious ailments happen to us
because of an external invasion from an organism.
You must go to the doctor,
don’t try to meditate on it. (Laughter)
But seventy percent of the ailments on the planet are self created.
I am saying self created
because it happened from within you.
So what is happening from within
you can be very easily fixed from within you.
What comes to you from outside you need outside help for that.
So you have to fight an organism then you need medicine.
The rest of the ailments, almost seventy percent are self created.
Why would your body work against you?
This body is essentially programmed for health.
Every cell in this body is programmed for health.
Why would it turn against to you?
Because somewhere you are not keeping it happy.
To put it in a very simple language –
why would your own family turn against you?
Somewhere they’re not happy with you, isn’t it? (Laughs)
Yes or no?
They’re not happy with you, with something that you’re doing.
So similarly, some cells in the body,
some parts of your body are not happy with you for some reason.
You must pay little more attention.
There is a way, a systematic way of paying attention to this one,
because everything in this body was created from within.
When it is so, can’t it fix from within?
So this is not a miracle.
I want people to understand.
this is not a miracle.
What is a miracle is
Suppose you did not know what is electricity.
I came here and I just press that part of wall and lights come on,
who do you think I am?
Suppose, you know, a thousand years ago if I had a cell phone, tch,
I could just pull out the cell phone and talk to somebody in America,
you would think I am God, isn’t it
So what is a miracle is, that which you do not understand,
that which is not fitting into your un… your logical perception,
seems miraculous to you.
As your logic evolves, so many things which were miracles hundred years ago
are normal things in our day to day life today, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
So it is not a miracle, it’s just a deeper understanding of your
of your own, the way you’re constructed.
So this is something that we need to pay attention to.
Sadhguru: Neither enlightenment nor en-darkenment describe what it is.
That’s why people said nothing.
When they said nothing,
you thought they are dumb.
They said nothing because they knew whatever they say is bound to be wrong.
So you need to understand this.
Whether we talk about enlightenment or en-darkenment or whatever else,
we are only talking around it,
never it.
We are talking around it to bring you closer.
Instead of talking there (Gestures) you talk here.
So the talk draws you closer.
Close is not in.
‘I am almost there’ is not a good place.
People who continuously fail in their lives,
they always have this thing ‘I almost made it.’
‘Almost made it’ is not a good thing.
You made it,
you did not make it,
that's all there is with life.
So is darkness
do you know what is darkness?
You do not know what is darkness.
To some extent you have a context for the light.
You know light to some extent not wholly,
to some extent
because you have never travelled with light.
Nothing travels as fast as light.
A few months ago
the European scientists who’ve always been living
with a wound in their hearts
that Einstein, an American,
an American,
he came out with this theory that they cannot disprove.
So two months ago the European scientists came up with this thing,
that they found neutrinos which travels faster than light.
And about five days ago,
they came out or they admitted or somebody made them admit
that there was a mistake in the measurement because of power outage.
Because of a power outage,
they mismeasured the thing
and they thought neutrinos are going faster than light
but nothing is going faster than light as far as we know right now.
But darkness is going faster than light
because darkness need not go anywhere, it's everywhere.
Something that is everywhere at the same time is
definitely faster than that which travels, isn't it?
You understand what I am saying?
Something travels from here to here fast
but something is here also and here also at the same time,
it is definitely faster, isn't it? (Applause)
No, no, no, don’t clap,
this will not win me a Nobel Prize or something. (Laughter)
Now you don't know what is darkness.
That which you cannot perceive is darkness, isn't it?
That which you cannot perceive is darkness.
But there is no such thing as darkness.
There is something called light
but there is no such thing as darkness.
All that you do not know is in the dark, isn't it?
All that you cannot perceive is in the dark.
If we turn off the lights in this hall you cannot see what's in front of you,
so you are in darkness.
If you could see, you are not in darkness.
How you saw,
whether because we turned on a light from outside
or you managed to see by yourself,
still darkness would not exist.
There are many many creatures in the forest which are right now foraging around,
hunting,
waiting for dinner,
having dinner doing so many things.
No electric lights.
You ask a tiger ‘What is darkness?’
He says, ‘Where is darkness?’
There is no darkness for him.
He sees well enough in the day,
he sees well enough in the night.
Do you think in his experience anything looks dark?
Nothing is darkness
because darkness never existed.
That which is not in your perception is darkness.
So we said, ‘Shiva is the dark one’
because he is that which you are yet to perceive.
What you are yet to perceive is darkness.
What you have perceived is light.
So we prefer to call realization as enlightenment.
It's definitely more appropriate
because it's something that you have seen.
Something that you have not seen is darkness.
We cannot refer to one’s realization to something that one has not seen.
And what you have not perceived
is a much bigger dimension than what you have perceived,
that which is not,
which we are right now referring to as darkness.
See right now it is not the light which makes you see.
I want you to get this straight. (Showing a small vessel)
Now you can see this little object not because of the light,
because this object reflects the light,
otherwise you wouldn’t see.
Suppose this did not reflect any light,
light passed straight through this, you wouldn’t see it.
You are not seeing the air
but if there is dust in the air you can see it.
So, you are not seeing something because of light.
You are seeing something because something stops light.
So that which stops light is what is in your perception.
That which stops light is in a way anti-light, isn't it?
Anti-light should be darkness but it is not.
Darkness doesn’t care;
it allows light to pass through, nothing happens.
Light is powerless in darkness, please see.
Only if there is something which stops the light,
light is an effective force.
If nothing stops it, if you ignore it (Gestures) it means nothing.
So, the whole process of spiritual process is just this.
Right now you are relevant, you as a life is relevant
only because something stops you. (Laughs)
You don’t like that?
Let me put it in context for you.
Something stops you means
your body stops you,
your wife stops you,
your husband stops you,
your job stops you,
things around you stop you.
Because you are bouncing off all these things,
your life is relevant.
If we strip you
if we stripped you of all these things it's irrelevant, isn't it?
But if you exist in that irrelevance,
instead of living in reflected glory
if you learn to live in this irrelevance,
suddenly you find there is something so phenomenal.
Brahmacharia means just this,
to make your life irrelevant.
No context,
simply here,
nothing.
There is nothing that you bounce
you can bounce yourself off.
No relationships,
no friendships,
no belonging,
no nothing,
simply.
If you learn to live like this,
then the very boundless will open to you.
Right now you are bouncing off petty particles
and these petty particles are giving you some relevance.
But if you stop seeking that relevance
and simply sit here,
you will see a boundless nature
which doesn’t need any context exists within you.
So that we can call it darkness,
we can call it Shiva,
we can call it Brahman,
we can call it whatever.
It is that boundlessness,
it is only when you touch that boundlessness
you have a taste of freedom.
Till then your very existence is relevant only because
you are bouncing off something.
If there is nothing to bounce off,
you are like light.
Light is irrelevant if nothing stops it.
Even if you have a very powerful light,
if nothing stops it
it's irrelevant because nobody will feel it.
Only when something stops it,
it becomes relevant.
So the de-lightment,
I am sorry enlightenment (Laughs)
these are just words,
something,
we have to use some word.
From now on we will replace the word ‘enlightenment’
from bhum bhum.
When I say bhum bhum it means enlightenment.
If all of us start using this word ‘bhum bhum’
‘Oh! Bhum bhum!’ (Laughter)
What?
Bhum bhum bhum.
So these are just words
Questioner: All masters say,
‘Go turn inwards,
turn your indriyas inwards,
travel inwards,
seek yourself within.’
Some practical suggestions of how does
how one goes about this?
Sadhguru: So I don’t know what somebody else is saying
because as I told you
my main sadhana has been to remain uneducated and uninfluenced by anything around me.
Is it… is it true that who you are today as a physical entity
happened to you from outside?
Is it true?
I think many of you have been constantly attending spiritual discourses,
that’s why you learned this,
it doesn’t matter what ridiculous stuff I ask,
you’ll say (Gestures)… (Laughter)
training, spiritual discourse training;
whatever they say. (Gestures)
Is it true that you created your body from outside?
Is it true?
Hmm?
They’re saying ‘Yes,’
what is the problem? (Laughter)
Did you create this body from inside or outside?
From inside,
so the source of Creation is within.
When the body was this small also, it was there.
Now also, it’s there - isn’t it?
So why is it that you are not in touch with it?
It is very simple as we went through this already -
your sense organs are outward bound. That’s the reason.
You need to understand this.
Suppose as a child
you were lost in the jungle,
no contact with any other human being
and something edible came in front of you,
would you take it and stuff it into your ears?
Tell me yes or no?
No, you would know where to put it.
No training.
Your mother did not tell you how to eat,
but still would you know where to put it?
Yes.
So all the things that concern your survival process
nobody need to teach you,
anyway it is built into the system.
Anything beyond survival if you have to know,
then you need striving.
Do you remember when you were four five years of age
just to write A, B, C
how complicated it was.
Hmm?
The damn ‘A’ you had to write it one hundred times to get it right.
Isn’t it so?
Do you remember?
Just ‘A’ three lines,
how complex it looked to you at that time.
Today, if I ask you to write without thinking,
without even a thought on your mind you can just write,
why?
Because of the striving that you put in there, isn’t it?
If that striving was not there,
even today your condition would be same, isn’t it so?
To put those three lines you would still struggle.
So you need to understand this,
anything beyond survival process will not yield to you unless you strive for it.
Now the question that you’re asking is,
‘Can you give me some tips here how to turn inward?’
Yes, I can give you tips
but obviously you’re already a veteran,
you’ve been to many places,
you’ve heard many people and it’s not worked.
Do you want this place also not to work for you? (Laughter)
Are you determined about that?
No.
If that is so, don’t ask for suggestions.
I don’t give any suggestions to anybody
nor advices to anybody.
There are methods.
If you explore these methods,
you will naturally turn inward.
Instead of going through a process
you are trying to intellectualize everything.
It’s like this.
Somebody wrote… See, all these spiritual books that you read,
if you’re reading them
it’s a sure way to see that you will never be spiritual.
Yes,
because you will know all the jargon but nothing will happen within you
because you’ll intellectualize everything.
Everything what should have been a living experience,
you will make it into knowledge.
That’s not going to work.
So there are simple methods.
Now what we are offering as Inner Engineering is essentially this.
If you give me twenty eight hours of focused time,
your time,
if you give me twenty six to twenty eight hours of focused time
I will build a vehicle for you
which will naturally transport you inward.
But you want it today evening?
Ahh… ‘Turn inward’ (Laughter)
slogan,
it’s not going to work.
Sadhguru: What is this? Nature….?
Sadhguru: Are you asking this question as a woman or a banker?
Sadhguru: If you are woman, devotion is enough.
If you are a banker,
we need to do head-breaking,
heart-breaking sadhana.
I want you to understand how difficult the spiritual process is going to be for you,
is determined by you not by nature and not by your guru.
The nature or the Existence or the Creator and your guru are seeing
how to make it as easy as possible,
as simple as possible,
as quick as possible.
Because if you take time, it’s not a question of your life going waste,
it’s a question of my life going waste.
If you don’t make it, it’s not a question of you failing,
it’s a question of me failing.
You see, I don’t like to lose.
You can see that?
I don’t like to be on the losing side.
You can see that.
You must see how I drive on the street,
I don’t like to be on the losing side. (Laughter)
If you are here as a woman,
it’s very simple.
But you are so many other things.
Foreign banks are difficult to handle. (Laughs)
Because there are hidden clauses.
In every agreement we sign, there is a hidden clause.
It’s printed in micro print that it takes a lifetime to read them. (Laughter)
So most people sign them without reading them.
So wipe out all the hidden clauses.
Just be here as a woman, very simple.
If you are here just as a man or just as a woman, (Claps) that’s it, it takes.
It doesn’t take all this talking and nonsense and rubbish.
If I just do this, (Claps) you should just be there.
So devotion is another dimension of intelligence
which unfortunately today’s world has lost out on.
Now that little boy who is playing violin,
he is just sixteen years of age.
He is not very far between the genius
he is not very far behind the genius of his father.
He is pretty right there.
It just takes …it’s going to take very little time for the boy to catch up.
That has come not because of training.
That’s come because of simple devotion.
You see how he sits?
see how he sits next to his father,
with great amount of love and devotion.
You look at his eyes, he looks at his father
with that kind of love and devotion.
In that, learning happens in a completely different way.
There is a very… there was a fabulous saint.
In Andhra Pradesh,
there is no home in Andhra Pradesh
who will not have at least a little book about this saint.
His name was Vemanna.
His name was something else, they called him Vemanna.
So his name is Vemanna.
So he was with his guru
and this boy is little dim.
He is a dim companion.
He is such a simpleton, can’t get anything straight.
I have lot of them like that (Laughter) and they are doing great.
They can pull off anything.
It is the intelligent one,
it’s people who think they are intellectually smart
who are getting all tangled up in Isha.
Simpletons are doing great.
Somebody else may think he is nothing.
But just see the result he is creating, it’s fantastic.
So this is a simpleton.
Everybody
he’s butt of everybody’s jokes.
One day
But the guru takes kindly to this boy
because he is not smart like others.
So one day guru has an important function or an event to go to.
So he goes to the river for bath.
And his clothes folded, he tells the boy,
‘You hold the clothes in your hand. Stand here.
Don’t keep it down because the ground is wet and it’ll get soiled.
Don’t keep it down.
Just hold it, that’s all.’
So the guru went in to take his ritual dip and wash himself
and when he came out the boy had kept it down.
The clothes were soiled.
And he kept it down because when the guru looked like this, (Gestures)
he thought he needs something and he kept it down and ran to the guru.
He is simple. (Laughs)
One thing at a time, he cannot handle two things at a time.
Because these are two things, clothes and guru.
Two is complicated.
And the guru looked at this.
Now he has to go somewhere.
His clothes are soiled.
And he told him repeatedly
‘Don’t keep it down, don’t keep it down’ and he keeps it down.
So he gave him a little chalk and he told him,
‘You fool, there’s nothing else you can do.
Sit here and write just ‘Rama, Rama, Rama’ on this rock,
nothing else.
You can’t do anything better.
Just do this.
Hope grace will descend on you.
Just sit here and write ‘Rama, Rama, Rama,’
just over and over again on the same place.’
The boy felt so ashamed, so pained because
he let down his guru.
He told him so many times but somehow he cannot get it.
So he started writing.
The guru left in a rush.
After the whole day, some event,
he came back in the evening and first thing is he asked for this boy,
‘Where is he?’
because he was feeling bad for the harshness with which he spoke to him.
He was nowhere to be seen.
‘Oh, then I told him to write ‘Rama’
and we did not give the next instruction.
Maybe he is still there.’
And he went.
The boy was still writing ‘Rama.’
The chalk had worn out long time ago.
His forefinger and thumb had worn out right up till here, (Gestures)
and he was still writing ‘Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama.’
The guru just took him and embraced him
and this boy -
I don’t know how many, somebody who is knowledgeable about this should say
he wrote hundreds of fabulous poems which is even today,
after a few hundred years,
even today there is no Telugu speaking home
where there’ll be no book on Vemanna’s poems.
Almost every home will have it.
Anybody who can read and write, in their home there will be.
And just about everybody is conversant with these poems.
Brilliant poetry he just poured out, out of his devotion.
So, that’s what devotion can do
because devotion is another dimension of intelligence.
Devotion is the intelligence,
you understand as a bigger intelligence
and you have learnt to keep your little intellect aside.
That is devotion.
Devotion does not mean everyday doing pooja, doing this, doing that.
Devotion simply means your involvement with life is so absolute
that even you don’t matter any more.
Your involvement with what you have taken up is so absolute
that who you are does not matter.
Then you are a devotee.
Devotion means you are devoid of yourself, that’s devotion.
And there is no greater intelligence than that
and there is no greater sweetness than that.
The sweetness that a devotee knows, no lover will know,
no pleasure seeker will know.
Even if you go to heaven, you will not know.
Heaven is a bad place, believe me.
You better make it here. (Laughs)
You…They have told you what kind of people went to heaven,
with those people can it be a great place? (Laughter)
People who are thinking of fluffing around on clouds,
that’s their greatest pleasure,
people who are thinking of twelve virgins,
great food, drink –
you want to end up with those people for the rest of your eternity?
Do you want to shack up with these people who just go to some far away place
just because they want to drink in rivers?
Please don’t end up there.
This is a great place
and there should be no next place for you.
(Questioner): Sadhguru, what are your views on adultery?
How does it affect one spiritually?
(Sadhguru): If there is no love in your heart,
you are anyway an adulteress.
For convenience and comfort
if you have given yourself to any aspect of life,
not necessarily a man
or a woman for that matter.
Without love in your heart,
if you have given yourself to any aspect of life
you are an adulterer, isn't it?
So, am I against adultery?
Yes,
in that sense yes, with every aspect.
But if you are talking about
what is considered socially as adultery,
it is individual;
and for every action that you perform there is a consequence.
Most people I know,
they are not willing to face the consequences when they come;
but without facing consequences
they want to have situations that they enjoy.
Then
anybody who is not willing to joyfully accept
the consequences that come to them for whatever actions they perform
is just a fool.
And a fool is somebody who is against himself in so many ways.
Anybody who works against himself;
anybody who turns himself against himself,
or herself against herself,
what should we say about them?
So, with your actions,
if you are turning yourself against yourself,
because
you do things senselessly;
you are not doing things by choice.
You are doing things senselessly
simply because you have given in
to a certain aspect of your body or your emotion or something,
then definitely it’s not ok
because you will bring suffering to yourself.
Anything that brings suffering to any human being,
especially to himself,
is it ok?
Anybody who simply goes about bringing suffering to themselves,
for whatever reason they have,
it doesn’t make sense, isn't it?
I am not against or for anything.
I want you to live sensibly.
What makes utmost sense to you,
you must do that.
Is this wrong, is that wrong?
That’s not the point.
Are you living your life sensibly, that’s the question.
Or are you a slave of something
and trying to find approval from me
for some nonsense that you do.
No.
I have neither approved any action
or disapproved any action.
As long as you are, as long as you are behaving sensibly
about what you are doing.
A senseless life is sin, isn't it?
If you live sensibly,
in a way that creator will be proud of you, its fine.
If you have just given into
either the ways of your body,
or your emotion
or your mind,
and going against yourself,
it’s not sensible.
So such senselessness, is it wrong?
I am not even saying it is wrong,
it’s just very limited and stupid.
I have never termed anything
right or wrong in my life.
But anything that is limited and stupid is not worthwhile,
that’s all.
So I would say adultery is not worthwhile.
Is it right or wrong?
Who am I to pass a judgment on anything about life?
I don’t pass judgments about life,
but it is stupid and limited to do anything
which causes suffering to yourself.
It is stupid and senseless to give into something
which seems to be everything today
and tomorrow will make you feel like a fool, isn't it?
It’s stupid to give in to something
which makes you think today it’s everything
and tomorrow morning
it makes you look like a fool to yourself.
Not to somebody else.
That is a senseless way to live.
You must live in such a way, with so much sense,
that gods should be envious of you.
If you show such sense
there is no right and wrong with your life.
If you don’t have such sense,
everything is wrong with your life.
(Sadhguru): When we say Krishna,
the essence of who he is,
he is an irrepressible child,
a terrible prankster,
an enchanting flute player,
a graceful dancer,
an irresistible lover,
a truly valiant warrior,
a ruthless vanquisher of his foes,
a man who left a broken heart in every home, (Laughs)
an astute statesman
and kingmaker,
a thorough gentlemen,
a yogi of the highest order,
and the most colorful incarnation.
Krishna is seen and perceived and understood and experienced
in many, many different ways by different people.
Duryodhana,
through the eyes of Duryodhana,
for those of you who do not know the background
I will be
because unless you understand the whole tapestry of the story
and the situation in which he existed
many aspects of who he is will be missed.
So we will go into it,
but right now
Duryodhana is a man
because of certain situations into which he was placed,
insecure, angry, jealous,
greedy and feeling wronged all his life.
And because of actions which came forth from his greed and anger
he became the key for destruction of his whole race.
In Duryodhana’s words,
‘He’s a smiling rouge if there was ever one.
He can eat,
he can drink,
he can sing,
he can dance,
he can make love,
he can fight,
he can gossip with old woman,
play with little children.
Who says he’s God?’
That’s Duryodhana’s perception. (Laughs)
Shakuni,
the very embodiment of deception and cunning,
Shakuni says,
‘Let us suppose he is God, so what?
What can a God do?
God can only please those devotees who please him.
Let him be God.
I don’t like him.
And when you don’t like somebody
you must praise them.’ (Laughs)
That’s deceit.
Radhe, his childhood lover,
a milkmaid,
a simple woman of the village,
but with such unfaltering love and devotion
she has become so big
that today you cannot talk of Krishna without Radhe.
We don’t say Krishna Radhe.
We say Radhe Krishna.
She has become,
a simple village woman,
she has become as significant as Krishna
or a little more significant than him.
She said,
‘Krishna is with me.
He’s always with me wherever he is,
whoever he’s with, he’s still with me.’
That’s her perception.
Vainteya,
a youth
who was the Garuda chief’s eldest son
living on the mountains of Gomantak,
a sprightly youth,
because of a certain ailment became totally crippled.
This crippled youth after he met Krishna,
Krishna made him walk.
So Vainteya said,
‘He is God.
He is God.
He is God.’ (Laughs)
Akrura,
an uncle of Krishna,
a wise and saintly being
expressed his perception of Krishna this way,
‘Krishna,
when I look at him,
this strange young boy,
I see the sun,
the moon,
and the seven stars whirling around him.
When he speaks
he sounds like the voice of the eternal.
He is the hope.
If there is hope in this world he is the hope.”
Shikandin,
a tortured human being,
because of a certain situation within himself
right from his child.
This is an absolutely tortured soul.
So Shikandin said,
‘Krishna never gave me any hope
but when he is there
the breeze of hope touches everybody.’
I can go on like this.
Different people saw different facets of who he is.
For some he’s God.
For some he’s a crook.
For some he’s a lover.
For some he’s a fighter.
So many things he is.
If we want to taste an essence of what it means when we say Krishna,
the consciousness that we refer to as Krishna,
if we have to be touched by this
we need Leela.
Here we are for the Leela.
Leela means
it is the path of the playful.
This is not for the serious types.
Are you?
(All Laugh)
Because when I say playfulness
we are not here just to play,
we are here to explore
the most profound and the most serious aspect of life
but playfully,
conducted playfully.
Otherwise Krishna won’t be there.
The reason why the most profound dimensions of life have missed
have been missed by the vast population of the world is
because they do not know how to be playful.
If you want to explore this path playfully,
if you want to be playful
you need a heart full of love,
a joyful mind, and a vibrant body.
Otherwise there is no Leela.
[Questioner] How have we been assigned to this particular part of the planet,
in terms of people, in terms of parents, in terms of people. This is in terms of existence on this planet
and the other question is, which again triggers my belief in God is,
who is the person who controls our life
before we are born and after our death?
[Sadhguru] See, you believe lots of things.
So, you believe before you were born, you were somewhere.
After you are dead, you are going to be somewhere else.
Everything you believe.
Too many assumptions.
When you have so many assumptions,
no way to approach truth. Isn’t it so?
If you want to approach truth,
the first thing is you don’t assume anything.
Is it so?
If you are interested in truth,
if you are searching for truth, that means
you have not assumed anything, is it so?
If you’ve already made your assumption,
you’re just trying to find the confirmation for your assumption,
that is not seeking truth.
A true seeker of truth has no assumptions, he is just looking.
Shall we just look or shall we try to confirm your assumptions.
Hmm?
You want confirmation.
You are right.
Does that get you any closer?
If I tell you, your beliefs are right,
does it get you any closer to truth?
Does it?
You’ll feel better.
“Ah, ok I have been right,”
but nothing gets solved, isn’t it?
Life doesn’t get solved, does it?
No.
So, confirming your belief systems doesn’t mean anything.
This is a big problem with human beings:
they want to be right all the time.
It’s the biggest problem.
In fact it is the basis of all conflict in the world.
“I am right, you are wrong” – this is the problem, isn’t it?
Isn’t it so?
“What I believe is right,
what you believe is wrong”
isn’t this the basis of all problems in the world?
Whether it’s within the family or in the community or in the world, or wherever?
Yes?
Shall we eliminate the problem a little bit?
The first thing you need to do is,
after all
they are your beliefs
and your beliefs are not original - picked up, isn’t it?
Your priest or mullah or father or mother,
somebody put it into you. Isn’t it so?
Picked up from somebody.
It depends how powerfully they worked on you.
And they worked pretty powerfully
because the business is at stake otherwise.
So, what you assume may have nothing to do with reality.
Now, you are trying to understand something
which is beyond the physical with physical context,
it won’t happen.
You are trying to perceive something
which is beyond physical through sense perception.
Such a thing cannot happen.
Now, you want to measure the depth of the ocean
but you went with a foot scale.
You will obviously come with wrong conclusions. Isn’t it so?
If you want to measure the depth of the ocean,
your first business is to get the right kind of instrument,
yes?
Yes or no?
That’s your first business.
That’s all I am saying.
You want to know something beyond the physical.
First thing that you need to do is
to have a perception which is beyond five senses,
which can perceive that which is not physical.
Only then you perceive,
otherwise you can only believe or disbelieve, isn’t it?
If I tell you God is actually in my pocket,
these many people can believe me.
“This is a ridiculous thing, oh we don’t believe that.”
But I can tell you a more elaborate story if you want,
which we can work on and make you believe in, isn’t it?
Right now, God is in my pocket,
this many people believe me,
this many people disbelieve me.
Have these people gotten any closer to God than they were before.
Have they?
Or have these people gone any further away.
No,
nothing changes, isn’t it?
So, why are we wasting our time
trying to confirm our assumptions.
You must enhance your perception
because only by perceiving you will know.
There is no other way to know. Is it so?
You will know anything only when you perceive it,
till then you do not know it.
Is that a reality?
Is it a reality?
People who are not in talking terms with me -
is that a reality?
[Audience] Yes.
[Sadhguru] If you perceive, you know.
If you do not perceive, you do not know.
You are unwilling to admit “I do not know,”
so you believe, isn’t it?
If you are just trying to pass the social test,
belief is a good way to do it.
But you want to really know,
then belief is not a good way to do it.
Belief gives you confidence
and fools getting confidence is dangerous.
Do you understand?
When idiots become very confident, it’s very, very dangerous. isn’t it so?
Do you see intelligent are hesitant,
stupid are confident?
Have you seen this?
Great confidence,
because when you simply believe something
you will have great confidence.
You will have no doubt about anything
because you don’t apply yourself to anything.
You’re 100% sure.
You see George Bush, how confident he is?
He is very confident, isn’t he?
Doesn’t he seem like confident?
Very confident.
He came to India and declared
“I am a believer,
I am a true believer.”
I thought “you don’t have to say it, can’t we see.”
You must be a believer,
otherwise you don’t walk blind into situations.
If you’re somebody with sense you would look around, isn’t it?
You would see what is there and what is not there
because you are a believer,
not just in God,
in so many other things.
The most sensible way to start your life is
“What I know I know,
what I do not know, I do not know.”
Once you come to this sincerely,
you will see
your knowing will constantly go on expanding on a daily basis.
Otherwise the moment you believe, you are stagnant.
Belief is death actually.
Marx said “It's the opium.
Religion is the opium because it puts people to sleep.”
He is very right.
It puts people to sleep, isn’t it?
Hasn’t it?
Sleep is comfortable.
What’s wrong with it?
Why sleep?
Why don’t you die?
It is even more comfortable, do you know that?
Because anyway you’re a believer.
After all, your God is waiting,
why don’t you go?
Yes, isn’t it?
Because anyway you know when you die you will go to God.
What is the problem,
why are you waiting,
going to this hospital, all this nonsense, why don’t you go?
Why are you delaying your progress towards God?
That’s not right.
You are not a true believer, isn’t it?
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Sadhguru one of the five elements pancha bhuta is akasha
space and in one of your You Tube videos I’ve heard you
I mean you say ether… you mentioned ether about space in akasha.
So once you
in your talk now in time travel you talk about space.
So this ether and space akasha I’m bit confused.
Can you please elaborate on the ether part?
Sadhguru: I’m glad you are confused (Laughter)
because confusion is a much better state to be
than stupid conclusions that one makes,
confusion means you’re still looking, that’s nice.
That’s my intent to keep you confused (Laughter/Applause),
yeah
because I want you to be seeking always.
Nobody said akasha is space,
we said akash is ether
that’s not an appropriate translation but reasonably.
Ether is not space,
ether is a certain dimension of existence - subtle.
When we say space, we are talking about kala or non-existence,
we are talking about Shi-va – “that which is not.”
When we say akash we are talking about that which is.
Here you are
Here you are as a human being,
there’re many levels from grossness to subtleness here.
If you have constipation you still have something gross inside you, hmm?
Above that there is little more refined aspects of body,
above that there is a lungful of air,
above that there’s a brain and thought and emotion and so many things.
And there is life going in and out.
And there is akasha involved.
There is water,
there is physical material,
there is air,
there is temperature,
there’s fire and there is akash which makes this.
Don’t try to understand that, just get this right (Referring to oneself)
because this is made… this is a mini-cosmos.
So if you perceive this right,
you know that because today there is no question about this anymore.
We’ve always been saying this in the yogic dimension
but today modern physics has come up with what is called as the constructional theory
which is talking about how the design factor in the universe
whether it’s atomic or cosmic - is fundamentally same design.
You as a human being with this kind of form,
a grasshopper,
an earthworm,
a bird,
a crawly creature somewhere
all of you have same fundamental design
from atomic to cosmic the fundamental design is same.
The complexity and sophistication of how this design evolves into multiple forms is different.
Your design is far more complicated and sophisticated
compared to that of an amoeba
but the fundamental design is still same,
only the complexity is increasing.
So you don’t go about trying to observe the cosmos
because you don’t have a gallery view of the Cosmos
you cannot.
There’s no place where you can sit and observe cosmos.
And in fact you cannot observe anything except what happens within you.
Even if you take a telescope and look at the star,
the star is happening only the way it projects in your mind, isn’t it?
Yes?
You don’t see any star.
This is the reason why you see stars which don’t actually exist.
Many stars that you see don’t exist
but they’re projected in your mind in a certain way
and that’s how you know it.
Or in other words
you only can experience this (Referring to oneself),
or this is the only doorway through which you can experience anything.
Whether you want to experience the food that you eat
or the air that you breathe
or the people around you or the world around you
or the cosmos
you can only experience it the way this (Referring to oneself) is.
If this (Referring to oneself) is very clear you will see it the way it is.
If it has taken many forms and shapes
you will see it in so many different ways.
These days I think largely the mirrors have gotten flat, you know.
Even now I think if you buy some cheap mirror you will look like this (Gestures) (Laughter),
but if you get certain types of concave mirrors
you can definitely reduce your weight in a day (Laughter).
You just go stand you look (Gestures)
you look like a dash on. (Laughter)
So the mirrors give different impressions of who you are.
Suppose you always looked at your face with a slightly distorted mirror,
after some time you will assume that’s how you look.
Yes or no?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You think that’s how you look
because every day you looked at yourself
and that’s how you looked,
and you think that’s how you look.
So even now you think the world looks this way simply because
that’s how it’s projected in your mind.
If you evolve this mind to a more refined surface
that there is absolutely no any kind of wavering in it,
it is perfectly plain mirror
then it will reflect everything the way it is but upside down,
tch,
you know in the mirror everything is like this (Gestures).
So now you must have the intelligence to correct this without distorting it.
See most people ca… can’t turn a dosa around properly (Laughter).
If they try to turn the dosa around it’ll become those kind of things.
It takes certain skill to take something like this
and turn it around without distorting it.
So this is the problem with the mind,
one thing is already it is wavy or choppy,
whichever way you kept your mind
but it is definitely wavy.
You are seeing the world in the wavy mirror
and it’s looking certain way,
and most people have never attempted to turn it around
because they think that’s how it is.
When you want to turn it around
it takes a certain amount of skill to be able to turn it around without distorting it.
So you have two problems.
One is to first flatten the mirror so that it is undistorted,
and now a much bigger task of wanting to flip it around without any distortion.
So that is… we’ve not approached that in your life yet.
First to make the mirror absolutely without distortions
we still working on that one,
Is this air very much a part of you as a life? Hmm?
Meditators: Yes.
Sadhguru: Those who do not say anything we’re going to throttle you (Laughter).
It’s… it… Your life is spread all over here, isn’t it?
This is physical.
Even in this physical there are many levels of crudeness and subtlety, isn’t it?
There’re very gross elements in the body,
there are subtler elements in this body,
there is thought,
there is emotion,
there is air that you breathe.
Or in other words life is always from a hard core crudeness to many subtleties
depends how much you spread that is how much subtlety you have in your life.
How wide your wings spread that much of subtlety is possible.
So now what we are referring to as akasha is a subtle dimension of life.
If you suck out the akasha you cannot exist here,
if we suck out the air from this hall you cannot exist here.
Though you cannot see it still it is more vital than your hair,
I’m sorry (Laughter).
Because there is more spent
There is more money spent on hair-care on the planet,
definitely lot more than the brain care (Laughter).
You see where our values are (Laughs).
If you pull out all your hair you can still live,
if I cut your ears you can still live,
if I cut your nose you can still live.
If I just suck out this air that you cannot even see
most of the time you are not even conscious whether it exists or not
if I suck out the air you cannot live for a moment, isn’t it?
If we suck out the akasha you cannot live for a moment.
There is a very, you know there’s a temple in Karnataka in southern India
which is called the Annapoorneshwari Temple.
Anybody from Karnataka?
You’ve been to Annapoorneshwari?
So at the rear part of the temple where most people may not go
because I am always poking into nooks and corners,
others are all happy looking at the goddess (Laughter).
There is an inscription in Halle Kannada -
that means the old type of Kannada, which is over 3000 years old
there’s an inscription talking about how to design an airplane in a temple.
And they are saying,
“You can do like this but if you fly these machines
it will disturb the ether in the planet.”
If it disturbs the akasha
when they say akasha don’t think space
when they… they’re saying if you disturb the akasha,
then human beings will not know peace in their life.
Once akasha is disturbed, then psychological disturbances will become enormous.
I think you are a living proof (Laughter).
I think there was an old movie by Manoj Kumar which said Shor (Noise).
Air planes and air planes and you know the disturbance that it’s causing
and he is glad his ears went away one day (Laughs),
something like that,
yes.
So if we suck out the akasha,
this physical body will not exist for a moment.
So when we say akasha we are still talking about five elements,
as you yourself in the question you mentioned among the five elements
akash is one.
So when we say elements
we are not talking about empty space,
we are talking about one more substance
like earth,
like water,
like air,
like fire
we are talking about one more aspect of five elements.
So do not mistake akash for empty space.
Barkha Dutt: Do you think of yourself
as a yogi, a mystic or a guru?
Sadhguru: I’ve not wasted time thinking about myself (Laughter/Applause).
Barkha Dutt: What would you rather be thinking of?
Sadhguru: I don’t think usually.
Really.
For me, see
This whole thing, because of the type of very mediocre education that’s being delivered today,
we have raised thought to heaven unfortunately.
Thought is a simple thing.
I know this is against everything that you believe in
because you are also a believer (Laughs).
Barkha Dutt: No.
Sadhguru: Believer in thought.
Barkha Dutt: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: I believe in being able to ask questions.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Barkha Dutt: That’s what I do for a living.
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughter)! That’s good.
Barkha Dutt: So I must believe that it is possible to ask questions.
Sadhguru: You… you ask questions for a living,
my life is full of questions (Laughter/Applause).
Now
now the thing is what you call as thought is coming from the limited data that you have gathered
from the experience of your life.
Every person is the same thing.
How much ever we have gathered, it’s still too small compared to the size of this cosmos
and the way the phenomena of life is happening.
From this limited data,
you can recycle things and generate thought.
Or in other words, nothing new ever happens.
Same permutations and combinations of the same thing will go on forever.
The essence of what we’re teaching in the name of Inner Engineering is
to engineer yourself in such a way,
every moment of your life is a new possibility.
If it has to become a new possibility,
what is needed is perception.
When I say perception, people think opinions.
No,
I am talking about perception,
as you see here (Gestures), similarly enhancing your perception
so that you perceive life.
Right now when we say thought, emotion,
we’re talking about expressing life.
Expression is not so important,
once in a way we can express
but perceiving it is important because
this phenomena is too fantastic,
it’s not a small thing.
The greatest phenomena that’s happening here is life itself.
So if you want to know this phenomena,
the only way you can know,
the only doorway for you to know life is yourself.
See, right now can you see me?
Barkha Dutt: Yes,
I can.
Sadhguru: Can you… Can you use a finger and point out where I am?
(Barkha Dutt gestures towards Sadhguru)
Oh, you’re wrong. You know I’m a mystic from South India (Laughter/Applause).
Now this light is falling upon me, reflecting,
going through your lenses, inverted image in the retina,
you know the whole story.
Where do you see me now?
Barkha Dutt: Still in the same place.
Sadhguru: No.
Barkha Dutt: I do.
Sadhguru: You see me the way I’m projected in the firmament of your mind.
You cannot see me here (Gestures) in the very nature of your visual apparatus.
Where do you hear me right now?
Within yourself.
Where have you seen the whole world?
Within yourself.
Now if there is a grasshopper here, he doesn’t see me the way you see me,
he sees me differently.
He sees the whole world differently.
Now you… you can think, “Oh, he’s no good.”
This is the fundamental problem that we think his perception is no good.
No, no, his perception is very good for his survival.
Your perception is very good for your survival
but it’s not good enough to know the nature of life.
Barkha Dutt: But I
Sadhguru: So now, “what do I know” means
I have enhanced… enhanced my perception the way it is important
to know the nature of life, not just for survival.
Barkha Dutt: But if Inner Engineering as a spiritual technology is something that works,
I ask you again,
why do we need gurus?
Because that means the answers are within us.
Sadhguru: You’re speaking so much language,
did you learn A, B, C, D
Barkha Dutt: I think so.
Sadhguru: Do you remember when you’re four years of age,
that damn “A”, how complicated it was?
Barkha Dutt: Yes.
Sadhguru: two versions to it.
You had to write it a hundred times to get the damn “A”.
Today you can close your eyes and write.
So it doesn’t matter how simple something is,
without a certain guidance,
could you have picked up A, B, C, I’m asking?
No.
Similarly, when something new you have to approach,
if you don’t have the right kind of guidance,
you won’t pick it up.
W
Now, when people see, no matter… The number of things I’m managing is insane. Everybody thinks, “Sadhguru, is it possible? You must go crazy someday.” All volunteers, over three million volunteers, enterprises, businesses, okay, projects, mega-projects on the street, all kinds of activity going aroun… around the globe. If anybody has to go nuts, it’s me, okay? Because all run by volunteers. Run by volunteers means nobody is trained for the job and you can’t fire them for inefficiency because they’re volunteers (Laughter). All right (Laughs)? And anytime, they come in anytime and do great things, anytime they’ll walk away, all right? And nothing should collapse. Till now, I must tell you this, as we are sitting here, this day, probably little over three hundred and odd programs, Inner Engineering programs are happening in the world. Never in the last thirty-three years, one program has been abandoned or has failed (Applause). That…that takes enormous management but nobody will ever see me getting angry or miserable or tensed out or stressed out
Sadhguru:The thing is,
you need to understand this culture
unfortunately, it’s all been messed up and botched up
we are a godless country,
we are a country without any morals.
There’s no morality in this country.
We could live like this
and really live well because
there was a huge rise of consciousness.
Everything could be looked at simply the way it is.
people were ruled by their consciousness –
not by morality,
not by the fear of punishment,
simply by the sense of living.
So because there was such a society,
anything could be talked anywhere
and there was no issue.
Well, that’s not the condition right now,
that’s a different thing.
But this is how this culture and this nation evolved.
It took thousands of years of work
to get this mass of people to that state
But slowly, that is changing
because now,
we have taken in Western morality,
where something is good, something is bad,
something is god, something is devil,
something is high, something is low,
something is pure, something is impure.
There was no such thing in this culture.
We just saw life just the way it is.
How much of what to do in your life is an individual choice.
If you
Because we clearly understood the nature of human mind.
In this mind if you say,
‘Something is bad, do not think about it,’
that will become the full time job
in the minds of your friends
For any… any mind,
if you say, ‘Don’t think about this,’
only that they will think.
People who did not understand the nature of human mind
brought morality into life.
People who understood the mind,
the way it is
In this culture, we never said anything is bad or good.
We just said, ‘This is how it is.’
How much of what you do in your life is a individual choice.
How much this person eats
and how much that person eats is a individual choice.
But now, Western doctors are telling us
all of us should eat so many calories,
which is rubbish.
That’s not the… how the… way the body works.
If you eat, let us say
Let’s say you eat one kilogram of food,
same type of food, let’s say the same nourishment.
Both of you may be same body weight – maybe,
let’s say – both of you are same body weight,
both of you ate one kilogram of food,
it’ll not go well.
In one person, this food may go well.
In another person, maybe only half a kilogram goes well
and they’ll still maintain weight.
This is a fact.
You try it and see.
Take ten people and see.
This is a fact.
But now, they’re telling you,
mass producing everything, you know
Everybody must eat this many calories of food,
only then you will have this much energy.
This is simplistic nonsense.
Especially when it
comes to subjective dimensions of who you are,
this morality of everybody must do this,
everybody must do that, never worked.
Different people’s needs are different.
And we have produced so many perverted human beings on the planet
because we just said something is wrong
and you should not think about it.
If you just let it be,
reproductive organs are a small part of who you are.
But what should be in the reproductive organ
has been very efficiently pushed up into the human head.
Now, sexuality is not happening in… in their bodies,
it’s happening in their head all the time.
In your body, it’s a natural process.
In your head, it’s a sickness.
Yes?
In your body
it is just a natural process,
we are all born out of it.
There’s nothing right about it, wrong about it.
It’s just one little aspect of our life.
If we resist it, it’ll rise into our head
and now it looks like entire life is just about that.
Today, I would say
tell me if I am exaggerating the percentage
today, I would say,
ninety-five percent of human energy is either invested in sex or money.
Yes or no?
These are two small aspects of your life.
One is about your survival,
another is a certain aspect of your physiology, okay?
It has become so big because
somebody told you these two things are wrong.
So, we never looked at it that way,
so somebody wrote a text on that
what are all the different ways it happens,
what are all the different types of bodies that people have
and compatibility of two different individuals,
everything in explicit details, somebody wrote
because they never thought
I mean, they’re not looking at like this,
they don’t… they did not think, it’s pornography,
you understand?
They’re just describing life as it is.
So today’s eyes look at Kamasutra as
an authentication of pornography, okay?
No, that’s not what it is.
They’re just talking about it
like they would have talked about anything
because it’s just one more thing.
They did not think it’s everything.
They saw it as just one more thing,
so they wrote it like that.
So it’s like your physics,… chemistry textbook,
just like that they wrote a sexual textbook
They didn’t make much bones out of it.
But now, in today’s world, now,
people are looking at it like
it’s some kind of a endorsement
for all the perversions they have
Anupam Kher: I feel very proud to be an Indian and I’m sure lot of people feel,
but corruption bothers me and I'm sure you also spoke about it.
How… Do you think spirituality can help get rid of corruption to some extent?
Sadhguru: See, let’s understand this corruption, because
it’s a very important thing that everybody understands this properly in its right perspective
rather than reacting against a bunch of people
who are in an advantageous position, okay?
(Laughter)
Why I want you to understand this is,
because for the first time in the history of independent India,
these sixty four years,
that means two generations of people,
they have… at least fifty to sixty percent of them have had such a bad deal.
Today you and me,
will talk all this and go home and eat well.
There’s a whole bunch of people,
almost four hundred million people who cannot do that.
So if we handle the next five to ten years right,
we can change that.
It’s a tremendous possibility which is on our threshold.
There’s an economic possibility sitting on the threshold.
If we conduct this right, we can change their lives,
those people who have not eaten properly,
those children who are malnourished –
which is of the highest level of malnourishment,
those who are not educated,
those who don’t have opportunities,
those who are in that horrible social and economic pit,
their lives can change in the next five to ten years
if we conduct our act right.
Every Indian should understand this –
it is not just about economy means stock market,
it is about hungry people who will have food on their plate.
Economy does not mean stock market.
Economy does not mean foreign cars coming into India.
Economy does not mean you wear better clothes or this and that.
Improving economy means there will be no hungry children in the country,
which is something all of us should do something about (Applause),
and that possibility
that possibility is being jeopardized.
So this possibility is being jeopardized by a handful of people,
or it is wrong to say it’s a handful of people –
it’s a nation-full of corruption,
because how many people in Mumbai streets,
if there is no policemen, will stop at the red light?
I think only ten percent will stop.
So these ninety percent are corrupt people.
If they make… If you make them the chief ministers and prime ministers you know what they will do. (Applause)
So instead of just calling it by one bad word called ‘corruption’,
we need to understand
we as a society are trying to move from a feudalistic way of managing our lives to a democratic way.
The democratic way has still not sunk into us.
Democracy will not happen without an active sense of education as to what is democracy,
what is the power of democracy,
what it means,
what is the responsibility of living in a democratic society –
this has not been done,
we just took democracy from the British
and we think if they just put their vote and get their fingers dirty once in five years,
everything is settled.
No, we have not educated people.
We are still a feudalistic society acting to be democratic.
(Dr Sanjeev): That is indeed very interesting and earlier, Sadhguru,
you mentioned about the importance of practices like the Shambhavi Mahamudra.
The good thing is we have you back in Delhi in January
to teach Inner Engineering to Delhi people,
so I’m sure many people will benefit from that process.
A related question, Sadhguru,
you talk of Shiva as what he is not.
This is in context of
(Sadhguru): Now… you’re tuning this into a Sathsang kind of situation.
(Dr Sanjeev): But it’s another question.
(Sadhguru): Okay.
(Dr Sanjeev): What is not?
And what we know of human body is what is our awareness
as a healthy body.
How does this journey of human body go from
what is to what is not?
And what aspects of health one needs to be mindful
in taking this journey?
(Sadhguru): This… this ‘what is not’ is a scary thing for lot of people. (Laughs)
See one thing you need to understand is,
because we have so many Gods in India,
over thirty-three million Gods and Goddesses.
We’re a very rich nation that way.
Among all the Gods you can see,
you will see Shiva is the most athletic-looking God.
He is a fit God.
Not an old man who’ll bless you like this.
He is fit,
as fit as a man can be.
The lore, and some of the scriptures,
but mainly the lore, describes him as –
they say,
‘He is… He was as tall… he
when he stood next to a horse, he was level,
his head was level with the horse’s head.’
So they estimate that he was nine feet tall.
And when he came to South India,
in the south they described and said,
‘He is twice the height of an average woman.’
In the southernmost part of India,
average women of those days were about four-and-a-half or
less than five feet.
So both these things say he was a very, extraordinarily tall man.
Maybe nine or eight or whatever
Yesterday I met somebody who was seven feet, four inches tall.
He was… he was looking tall,
then I thought how Shiva should have looked?
I had to talk to this man only like this looking up.
So when we use the word Shiva,
we must understand in the yogic lore,
we never saw him as God.
We see him as ‘Adiyogi’ that is the first yogi.
Because he never introduced himself,
we gave him a name.
We said he is ‘Adiyogi’, because he is the first yogi we saw.
He never bothered to introduce himself, he is that kind.
Nor did he tell us where he came from
nor did he explain anything.
Ultimately, you don’t care where somebody comes from.
Ultimately, you only care what he has to offer for you.
Isn’t it so?
That’s all that matters, isn’t it?
So what he had to offer was very valuable,
so people went.
In that value,
definitely health was a serious issue too.
In those days
I am talking about over twelve to fifteen thousand years ago.
How do you arrive at this date?
The yogic date,
according to astrological and astronomical arrangements is much beyond,
but I am sticking to the modern date.
There are… there is iconographic proof,
there are coins in British Natural History Museum,
which show Rudra sitting in a yogic posture,
which is 12,200 or 12,400 years old coins.
So if somebody had to make a coin of him,
if he was that famous by then,
that they had to make a coin of him,
at least you can put another couple of thousand years behind him,
so at least twelve to fifteen thousand years old.
So in terms of health,
you know in the south at least,
I don’t know if it’s in the north also,
but in the south, there are temples where he sits as ‘Vaidyanath.’
That means he is a doctor.
He is… he treats people.
And this has been the tradition always,
the yogis on the side also handled health everywhere;
unless you came from a European studio.
If you grew up looking at the internal nature of the body
and the human system,
naturally health is also one of the things,
because if somebody is unhealthy,
you cannot ask him to seek mukti.
That’ll be insulting, isn’t it?
Somebody is in a hospital,
you cannot tell him, ‘You must attain mukti.’
It’s very improper,
please know this much.
You can talk to only somebody who is healthy and well
and you can… you can tell him and inspire him,
‘You must strive for mukti.’
When somebody is down,
you don’t tell him about mukti,
you tell him about getting back into action.
Basic aesthetics I am talking.
So when he came down to teaching people,
where he sat down and started expounding the nature of the body,
people asked questions about health.
He brushed it aside.
He said, ‘Don’t bother about the health.’
Health is only an issue
if you’re unhealthy.
If you have created ill-health, then health is an issue,
otherwise where is health an issue?
Health is not an issue, isn’t it?
For one who is perfectly healthy,
health is… health is not an issue.
Only for one who has attained ill-health
I am saying ‘attained’
because it’s an achievement!
When every cell in your body is working towards your health,
if you have worked against it,
it’s quite an achievement!
You must be living completely improperly to get there.
I know this wi’ll be… if you’re suffering some kind of ill-health,
this would be insulting.
That’s why I said, ‘I would never say such things
to somebody who is unhealthy.’
I believe you’re healthy and
I’m saying these things to you.
If somebody is down,
you can’t say these things,
but that is the reality.
Reality is just this –
this body is geared for health.
I know your doctor will say something different.
He will say there are genetic factors,
there’s this, that.
I want you to understand,
genetics are only information.
You can use information to get better
or you can use information to go back into the same cycle.
It’s up to you.
Information is empowerment
or information is entangling, please tell me?
It’s the way you use it, isn’t it?
So whatever the information that is there in this body
is not entangling.
If it was entangling, this life wouldn’t come forth as a new possibility at all.
This has all this information.
My great-great-grandfather was suffering from this,
that information is there in this –
this does not mean I must have it.
If I make the same mistakes that he did –
yes!
Otherwise it does not mean I must have it.
I have, for my reference that all these things have happened,
so this is how I must take care.
You will see
you know I
I don’t want to start this off now,
but if I check certain people in a certain way,
I can tell them in the next fifteen years,
what ailments they will get right now.
But I will not do it
because there are more important things to do.
What are you going to do in these fifteen years,
that’s more important to me
than after fifteen years,
are you going to be like that or
you’re going to be healthy,
because the system is already talking about it.
You are going to get a heart attack after fifty
at thirty, thirty-five,
it’s already talking about it.
Are you willing to listen, is the question?
If you listen carefully enough, it is already talking about it.
At least this much the medical science has to admit –
they could not predict a heart attack fifteen-twenty years ago.
Now they’re able to foresee it six months ahead,
one year ahead.
Yes or no?
Or even much more?
So the prediction time
the amount of time that you’re able to predict is increasing
because you’re able to observe more parameters.
But still,
your observation is all by instruments,
not by you.
You… Somewhere, we a’re forgetting,
all these instruments were created by this instrument.
If you enhance this instrument,
this is capable of perceiving in a certain way.
Only thing is
it needs a certain level of work and a certain level of focus,
certain dedication
and dedication is a scarce material.
So did Shiva offer solutions for health
for ill-health?
No.
He just said you
if you do these things,
ill-health should not enter your mind.
It is not even a thought on your mind.
It doesn’t exist for you.
Isha Vidhya Kid: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Can you tell us what a
what are the measures to adapt (adopt?) to improve our memory power
and how can we overcome from our exam fear?
Sadhguru: Exam fear, oh (Laughter)!
You’re asking the right one (Laughter).
Straight from the horse’s mouth,
somebody who had no fear of examination ever (Laughter/Applause).
That was my father’s greatest concern
that I had no fear of examination (Laughter).
He’d say, “Oh, this boy has no fear, what to do” (Laughter/Applause)?
This is the whole thing.
You are asking this question, it’s good,
but you must first understand
somewhere it’s spread around in this world,
in the society that fear is some kind of a virtue.
Fear is not a virtue,
fear makes you into the ugliest possible creature.
Most unpleasant experience in your life is probably fear.
That one thing not being there has made my life totally,
absolutely pleasant (Laughs)
because fear is about something that is yet to be.
Fear is about something that does not exist right now.
What will happen is the thing.
What will happen, you do not know.
When you do not know what you will write on the damn paper,
something that you’ve learnt a whole year,
you still do not know what you will write.
When this is the thing what will happen in your life,
you for sure do not know, isn’t it?
Yes?
But you’re imagining all the horrible things that will happen post examination.
No,
post examination there’s a wonderful vacation.
Yes (Laughs).
Then there’s
one day, they’ll announce result.
My tenth standard exam results I did not go to see.
My twelfth standard examination results I did not go to see.
Somebody later on one of
my family is boiling,
“Today is results what are you doing,
what are you doing” (Laughter)?
“What am I supposed to do” (Laughter)?
Then they will tell somebody that they know,
they will send word,
they must have gone seen what has happened to his result. Tch.
Well, somehow passed (Laughs).
Now the thing is just this
are you going to school to learn something
or are you going to school to prove something?
This is the thing that you have to decide, everybody must decide.
Have you come to the ashram to know something or to prove something,
you must decide this.
Once you go to any place to prove something about yourself,
sickness will set in
sickness of failure and success will set in.
For one who wants to learn
there is no sa… such thing as failure,
there is no such thing as success,
just a question of striving.
Somebody may get it in one day,
I may get it in ten days,
somebody may get it in hundred days,
it’s just a question of striving.
If your interest is to learn,
striving itself is a learning.
To be able to strive relentlessly itself is a huge learning, isn’t it?
So don’t try to prove anything.
Don’t try to improve your memory, please.
You went to school not to remember some rubbish
to learn something,
to enhance the horizons of your life
you had to know and understand something about this existence around you.
This is what is science,
this is what is mathematics,
this is what everything is,
what you are studying is not some subject,
it’s… it’s different pieces of life may be presented
in a most uninteresting way but still it’s life,
yes?
Whether you study… physics or chemistry or biology
or social sciences or geography –
you’re learning something that could enhance the scope and play of your life.
So you have to learn it.
If you remember it, it will not transform your life in anyway.
So you went there to learn.
If you have learnt, what’s the problem
what you know you write,
what you don’t know you want to copy from that guy next (Laughter)?
I will not talk about all those things
because many times teachers it seems are encouraging these things.
Getting a few marks more or less in tenth standard
is not going to make so much of a difference.
How much you learn will make a world of a difference,
how many things you grasped right now fundamentals
will make a big difference.
Right now focus on that.
Maybe the damn twelfth standard tch,
because today in India if you want to go to medical sciences
you must have
people from outside the country cannot believe this
you must get ninety-eight.
Ninety-seven percent you have nowhere to go.
How sensibly,
how wonderfully,
with how much competence you live your life is important,
how much you remember is not important.
I don’t remember a damn thing.
That’s why I can sit here and gossip with you simply (Laughs)
about anything
because there’s no burden of remembering anything.
So no anti-diarrheal tablets
and don’t worry about your memory
what you know you will do,
what you do not know anyway you cannot do
but if you know how to copy (Laughter)
it’s up to you (Laughter).
I wouldn’t do it
and I’m sure our teachers will not allow it
because at this stage in your life
you don’t start your life with deception.
Don’t
At least be… I’m not talking about honesty,
I’m talking about learning to be straight with life
so that tomorrow you don’t get all twisted out for small things.
But you are okay, this is how I am.
Okay I am get
I get only thirty-five, it’s okay,
this is how I am.
This will not determine the quality of my life.
I want you to understand this.
What marks you get will not determine the quality of your life
but with how much integrity you exist
will definitely determine the quality of your life.
So, no copying, all right?
Suppose you don’t know anything, it’s all right,
happily sit there and come out (Laughter).
Tell everybody I… I did not get it,
you do some yoga,
life will become long,
so you can take one more year (Laughter/Applause).
One more year to learn
no copying
because don’t lose your integrity for small things,
petty things these are.
Don’t lose your integrity for such small things,
tomorrow when big things come
you will not be able to stand up to them (Applause).
(Sadhguru): Conflict is happening everywhere in the planet in so many forms.
Between two countries it is happening;
between two communities it's happening;
within the family it is happening;
within you it's happening.
Yes?
But it is only because there is conflict within you
there is a possibility of conflict outside of you, isn't it?
Hum?
Because there is violence within you,
violence is possible in the world.
If there was no violence at all in you
would violence be possible in the world?
No.
So we just have to look at the conflict within.
If we just settle this outside conflict will slowly settle.
It will take sometime because we have put a certain momentum to it
but it has to settle, isn't it?
If all of us become truly peaceful human beings,
no conflict within us
would Bombay be peaceful?
Hum?
Do we have to separately cast
start a campaign for peaceful Bombay?
No.
If people were peaceful
society would be peaceful, isn't it?
So what is the conflict?
The conflict is just this;
you got identified with things that you are not.
You are identified with many things that you are not, isn't it?
Right now let's say this vessel belongs to you.
You don’t just hold it as a vessel.
Let us say this vessel came to you from your great great great grandfather;
now this is not just a vessel,
yes?
You are identified with it.
If I just grab this vessel and go away
you are willing to die to get this vessel.
Isn't it so?
Because you are so identified with this vessel now
if I just break this vessel
your heart will break.
Just see with how many things you have done this;
from the clothes that you wear
to the people who live with you,
the house that you live in,
the things that you own and possess,
everything has become you, isn't it?
Yes?
So what is you is not here;
what is you is spread all over the place.
When you are spread all over the place
naturally wherever you move it gets entangled somewhere.
Yes?
When what is you is so spread out
whichever you go,
every doorway you will get stuck.
That’s what is happening;
that’s why there’s constant friction and conflict
because you are identified with so many things that you are not.
When I say you are identified with things that you are not
it also includes your mind;
it also includes your body.
Your thoughts are not yours, please see;
your emotions are not yours, please see.
These are all things that you picked up from outside
and identified yourself with. Isn't it so?
Yes?
Your body is not yours,
it is something that you picked up from outside.
If you sit here and you are not identified with anything,
you are simply yourself,
you are not identifying yourself with anything
or you are not getting into a make-believe situation of
being something that you are not.
A man went to the psychiatrist.
He went and said,
‘Doctor, all the time I think I am wet paint.
I am afraid to touch anybody;
I don’t want anybody to touch me
because I think I am wet paint.’
Then the doctor said, ‘That’s no problem, I will treat you.’
Six months the doctor gave him very expensive treatment,
then slowly the patient felt better
and then he one day came and said,
‘Doctor I am just feeling fine.
I don’t feel like that anymore.
Thank you very much.’
He paid his bill and he wanted to shake his hands.
The doctor said, ‘I don’t want to get wet paint on my hands.’
Once you are identified with things that you are not
you are hallucinatory in nature, isn't it?
And all the conflict is coming simply because
you are not in touch with reality;
you are hallucinatory.
Your thoughts,
your emotions
are all coming from certain identifications.
Isn't it so?
If you can sit here, this Shambhavi will do to you;
if you sit here
you will see your body is here,
your mind seems to be somewhere out there
and you are somewhere else.
That means you’ve gotten disidentified with everything;
you’re just there.
Once you are not identified with the body,
once you are not identified with the mind
can there be conflict?
Hum?
If you’ve known any kind of suffering in your life
the suffering has either entered you through your body
or through your mind. Isn't it so?
Do you know any other kind of suffering?
Once there is a distance between you and your body,
once there is a distance between you and your mind
this is the end of suffering,
this being cannot suffer any more;
question of conflict doesn’t arise
The
main theme of the conference that we had for the last two days is how we will be able to
Solve this challenge of the addiction, which is spreading so wide as an epidemic the whole thing
and
Is it possible that?
You take them to the Tantra
To see that you gave them the higher levels of bliss so that the other thing drops off or what's the?
Remedy that you so much sunjai's for dealing with this big epidemic
If I say this I will be very unpopular in the United States, I think your mollycoddling your people a bit too much
if you do this they will never grow up you're treating adults like children so very wrong thing to do I
See already they don't like in the became school
See when you say an addiction
first of all they're getting a prescription
As you already said 80% of the opioids are being consumed in United States for five percent of the population
Obviously a whole lot of people who don't need it
Fever using morphine when somebody's limb got chopped off in a war or accident or something that's another level of pain, okay?
That's something different
But rest of the pain, you must be capable of handling
You got a little stomachache you want to take an opioid. I mean, it's going there. I'm saying for small things. It's being prescribed
So this may be your whole commercial
Angle to this that I don't want to look at it because I don't know the details of that aspect
But I think definitely there must be a commercial
Thing to it, but generally the culture is becoming like this that
Adults are being treated like babies and adults are expecting that they will be treated like babies
By the doctors by the government by entire society this should go
It's time to grow up
Okay, we must understand if we do certain things pain will come to the body
It will come naturally see the very wavy functioning is this
Suppose you're walking on the street a bicycle came you will step back not out of humility the consequence of pain isn't it?
If there was no pain even if a truck comes you'll walk into it
So everybody must understand the consequence of pain you do silly things to yourself
And then somebody will give you an opioid which will keep you Lala all the time
It's not right. I think it's fundamentally wrong first of all why are we getting people there?
Somebody in a war like situation something where injuries are not a grievous injuries. They're not simple injuries. That's different
But for every little pain that you get you need an opioid
That culture must be taken off first of all I don't think people will change this consciously because it's nice. You know
They're not going to change it I think it can be done by law
I know a lot of protests will happen, but after some they were not taking this just 15 years ago. Isn't it so?
Hello
Fifteen years ago. It was not there so they were managing without that way. I kinda managed in the next 15 years, too
There are certain aspects where it can be but the problem the real problem comes how do you know my pain?
You know how do you judge my pain my pain is too much for me, but you think it's not good enough
So this aspect is always there
That's a subjective aspect which we should leave it to the physician to judge I believe but there must be a law that
Only for certain things you can give it you can't just simply distribute candies
You
Sadhguru: If you hold
If you create any tension either in the body or in the mind,
you don’t need another enemy in your life,
you will just slowly work against yourself,
not just in terms of physical health,
in many different ways, you understand?
You will turn your own life energies against you.
Today we know very clearly that
people who are going through excessive tensions
definitely are inviting ailments, there is no question about it.
Medically it’s a proven fact, isn't it?
But much more than that is happening.
You are not only inviting health situation
health or ill health situations,
you are inviting a whole host of problems in the world
because how or in what way you reverberate,
accordingly you draw those type of situations towards yourself,
those kind of people towards yourself,
those kind of ultimate results to your own life.
So what we are talking about is not just about beating the stress,
not talking about just being little more peaceful.
If you want to create your life the way you want it,
you need to take charge of certain fundamentals;
otherwise you are just working your own energies against yourself
and this is not
when I said it’s a formidable enemy,
because the very source of creation is here. (Referring to oneself)
It’s better… It’s best that this source of creation is working for you,
not against you, isn't it?
Yes or no?
This… Such a powerful thing, it must be always working for you.
If it works against you, you are finished;
nobody can save you, I am telling you.
If the very source of creation within you begins to work against you,
ah nothing
nothing in this world is going to save you.
So it's very, very important.
It is not just about being little free from stress,
being little more peaceful, little more happy;
it's not about that.
To create your life the way you want it,
it's very important that first of all the body,
then the mind,
then the energies,
these things are attended to with utmost care.
This is as important as you going out and making money,
creating your family,
doing whatever
because all those things you may have and still (be) you may be miserable;
not only for yourself,
you may be causing much misery to everybody around you.
Not because you are good or bad,
simply because you are ignorant of life.
People are causing pain to each other not because they are good or bad.
They are just ignorant of the ways of life, isn't it? Hmm?
When whatever those people started nailing this man, it seems he said,
“They know not what they are doing.”
All he is saying is - ignorance is the only problem, isn't it?
Not because they are evil,
not because they are some Devil’s agents;
ignorance is the only problem.
“They know not what they are doing,” that’s the only problem, isn't it?
(Sadhguru): Of… of all the things in the world,
of all the things that a human being can do,
why yoga?
Everything that human beings can do is
essentially an expression of who they are.
Somebody sings a song
somebody dances,
somebody writes a book,
somebody paints a picture
whatever else we do,
is an expression of who you are.
You may be conscious of it,
you may be unconscious of it
but still everything that you say,
everything that you do,
everything that comes out of you is
essentially an expression of who you are.
So yoga, in that way is diametrically opposite to this
because it’s not an expression of who you are;
it’s about determining as to who you are.
It’s about determining as to what you want to be,
changing the very fundamentals of one’s existence.
Today there is substantial
medical and scientific evidence
to show that the very fundamentals of the activity of your brain,
your chemistry,
even your genetic content can be changed
by practicing different systems of yoga.
This needed no confirmation
because we have always witnessed this,
but today there is scientific data to prove this.
So this is not an expression of who you are;
this is about determining the nature of you wish to
who you wish to be,
changing the fundamental ingredients which has made you who you are.
So yoga as a system needs much more involvement
than any other things that one
any other… forms of things that we do
which are merely an expression of who we are.
If you find full expression through any particular activity,
it may also leave you somewhat transformed.
If you cook with all your heart, some transformation may happen.
Yes.
Taking care of a cow can change your life, you know?
If you sing with all your heart,
some transformation may happen.
If you dance with all your heart, some transformation may happen.
But that is only a certain impact that is happening
because of absolute involvement in a particular activity,
but essentially that activity by nature is an expression of who you are,
it is not determining the nature of who you are.
So when we transform our activity,
not as an expression of who you are,
’cause who wants to find expression like this
in the morning? (Laughs)
Definitely not, isn’t it?
So, it is not an expression,
it is a method,
it is a means,
it’s a technology through which you can change the shape of who you are;
literally also, otherwise also.
You can change the very shape of who you really are right now,
that can be transformed
because who you are real… right now as a person
is a combination of things –
genetic material,
before that the karmic substance that you carry;
because of that you chose a certain womb,
so the genetic material and since the moment you’re born,
whatever kind of impressions that have gone into you
in the form of variety of experiences,
situations, thoughts, emotions, relationships, associations,
whatever else you have imbibed,
all these things make you a certain kind of person.
When you say, ‘I am a certain kind of person,’
what you are saying is,
‘I have this kind of compulsions.’
When you say, ‘I’m this kind of person,’
what you’re saying is,
‘This is the kind of compulsions that I identify myself with,
so I am this kind of a person.’
People, you know
It’s a very western thing but it’s very much there in India today,
‘cause lot of Indians are far more western than West.
You know, if you go all the way west,
you come back to India,
so they are much more western than Westerners are today.
So people say, ‘I’m a morning person. I’m an evening person.’
So what they mean is,
‘Morning, I cannot wake up in the morning,
that means I’m an evening person.’
‘I can’t stay awake in the evening, so I’m a morning person.’
Not only that, people
it’s going far, you know,
some are Blackberry people,
some are Apple people.
It's all getting… World is getting divided into so many ways
they’re not just instruments that you use and keep it down,
you get identified with it.
So there are chapatti people,
there are rice people,
there are dosa people,
there are idli people, you know all kinds.
So what kind you are
is essentially a certain type of compulsions.
(Questioner): Sadhguru, as you told about
the thing that we have to enhance our capabilities.
Whenever I read about literature regarding great men of India,
I always find that they have renounced all their family and life
in order to achieve this perfection.
So as students, what are we supposed to do with
(Sadhguru): When you're a student
you must renounce everything else
that’s what you're supposed to do.
Anyway, it's not renunciation;
this is a complete misunderstanding.
Right now, you know,
like I go back somewhere
where I meet my university time friends and
school time friends
and they're little thrown off balance with me.
I'm with them as I was even then.
Nothing has changed with me
but they are little
some of them are quite successful,
very successful many of them,
some of them are reasonably successful,
whatever, the failures you don’t get to meet them,
we don’t know where they’ve gone.
So it's easier to trace the successful people in the world, you know?
Others you lose contact.
So even these people who are well
well-to-do in their lives,
they're little thrown off by my presence
because they’ve heard so much about me these days and
then they get nervous and they pull out their cigarette and,
‘Can I smoke?’
I say ‘You smoke if you want,’
then they say, ‘No,’ and they keep it.
‘You don’t smoke at all?’
I said,
‘No, because even these days we’ are trying to make even automobiles
which don’t smoke
why would I smoke?
I don’t smoke, I'm eco-friendly machine.’
‘You don’t drink also?’
‘No, because I'm always… look at my eyes and see,
I'm always stoned,
where is the need to drink?
So, no I'm always blissed out,
so I have no need to drink.’
‘Oh, you don’t do anything?’
(Laughter)
Their idea of life is
their idea of life after being successful,
their idea of life has been condensed to this,
that if they smoke ten cigarettes a day
and they have a drink in the evening
they're successful,
otherwise anyway they cannot sleep,
okay?
Otherwise they're anyway not able to sleep.
So such people will think
I have renounced smoking and drinking and whatever
no,
this is not renunciation,
this is just that if you choose something higher
See, right now there is somebody on the street,
your age boys are walking around, loitering,
they did not go to IIT,
they did not go to any college –
they look at you and think you have renounced
because day and night you're looking at the book and studying,
they're having fun on the street corner.
(Laughter)
In their eyes, in their perception,
you have renounced everything.
You have actually.
They go to cinema every day,
they tease all your girls who walk on the street,
they smoke, they drink, they do whatever
they want to do with their life at your age,
but you are
you are a renounced character,
you are here through the night, sitting up,
reading books, listening to these people
it's worse than renunciation!
(Laughter)
But in your mind you know you have not renounced,
you have only chosen to do something
which you feel is better than that, isn't it?
The same thing.
Somebody chose to do something that they saw as better,
as a higher possibility for them,
somebody who’s at a lower level of life thinks they have renounced.
Nobody renounced anything.
Questioner: I want to know about
how much of our life is governed by karma
and how much is our free will?
so many people I’ve heard said everything in your life is governed by karma
and the others, like,
we make choices.
So how
if we make a choice is
are we creating the karma from our choice?
Sadhguru: It is by your thought,
bt your emotion and your action -
this is how you perform your action, isn’t it?
So karma means,
till now whatever you did,
the residual impact of that is definitely there upon your life.
But this moment’s karma is in your hands.
Yesterday’s karma, you cannot change,
but this moment’s karma is in your hands.
This moment karma
this moment’s karma could be a karma of freedom or of bondage.
If you do
if you handle this moment in a certain way,
you will be free from everything that was yesterday.
If you do not handle it that way,
yesterday will rule you today;
this is also your karma,
this is also your
See, please do not understand karma
as some kind of punishment and reward.
It’s not like that.
It is just that everything that you touch with your mind,
with your emotion,
with your body,
a bit of it sticks to you;
the residual action is remaining with you.
Yesterday whatever you did, is it not there in your memory?
Is it not there in your memory?
Is it not influencing what you do today?
Yesterday what you thought,
is it there in your memory?
Is it not influencing your thought and action today?
Yesterday what you felt in your emotions,
is it not there in your memory?
Memory is not just mental memory.
Memory is on many different levels;
it is in your body,
it’s in your chemistry,
it’s in your energy,
in many different back-up systems are there for your energy… for your memory.
So this memory is acting itself out.
But this moment if you wish to be conscious,
this memory you can use it whichever way you want.
You can look back on your life and laugh at all the stupid things that you did.
You can look back on your life and cry,
‘Why did I do all this stupid things?’
Or you can look back on your life and learn that,
‘Okay, I did all these stupid things yesterday,
what is the smart thing that I can do today?’
Same karma.
Yesterday’s karma is same karma
but this moment’s karma can be different
depending upon how consciously you act this moment, isn’t it?
This moment’s karma can be either karma of sweetness or bitterness.
Yesterday might have been sweetness or bitterness;
you cannot change that.
Can you change what you did yesterday?
You cannot change that.
But what you make out of it today,
that you can change,
that is always in your hands,
always and always, it’s in your hands. ‘
Sadhguru: Having just shifted into dakshinayana
or the southern run of the sun,
of the relationship between the planet and the sun
has moved into the southern mode.
In the yogic culture,
this is held as the sadhana pada –
that means
this is the best time to work upon yourself.
And the end of the month is Guru Poornima.
Today,
just about everybody has a day for themselves (Laughs).
There are pet food days,
there are bubble bath days (Laughter),
there’s a Diabetes Day (Laughter),
of course many other days of some significance.
Of course now there’s a Yoga Day
but before all this happened,
there was a day for the guru (Laughs),
which is the Guru Poornima (Laughs).
So, that’s at the end of this month.
It's a… a very powerful pournami
on the full moon night
because the shifting of dakshinayana
and the first, second… the first three pournamis till the equinox
are of certain significance
for those who are doing internal things within themselves.
So this Guru Poornima is a reminder
that for the first time,
a being of immense possibilities and capabilities
took this step of wanting to share –
not by his own will,
he was kind of conned into it, tch.
I don’t want to go into the entire story now,
but he was kind of done (Laughs).
That’s why I said it’s very courageous
but a little, tch (Laughs).
So here we are.
This part of the world has always been referred to as
karma bhoomi –
that means a place to do things for yourself,
where you can take your destiny into your hands.
It's not that in other parts of the world you cannot do it –
you can.
It’s just that
here, because of certain natural forces,
there is an added support,
an advantage,
which people made use of
for millennia
and built structures and instruments through which
it could be enhanced.
And in the same
in the same aspiration,
to create a fantastic tool for people’s evolution
or hastening one’s evolutionary process,
someone dreamt of Dhyanalinga.
But he was very smart,
he didn’t attempt doing it (Laughter).
I think he must have been looking for a fool,
who was willing to attempt such a thing (Laughs),
and he found one
things happened (Laughs).
Liberation is scary because
you’re trying to remove the walls of prison
that you’ve been so used to.
When I say “so used to,”
it is not a question of one lifetime.
There’s a memory of entire evolutionary process in this (Referring to oneself).
Within your brain,
there is something called as a reptilian brain.
It is that dimension of your brain,
which is always thinking,
“How to fix a boundary?
What about my security?”
The other part of the brain,
which makes you a human being,
which is known as cerebral cortex,
is always looking,
“How to expand,
how to enhance,
how to empower myself?”
But the reptilian brain is always thinking of
how to build a wall around myself for my own safety and security.
So in search of security,
you’re downgrading the evolutionary process for yourself.
You need to understand that
the walls of self-preservation
are also the walls of self-imprisonment.
The coming of the Guru Pournami means for the first time,
for the first time,
someone brought this dimension into human life -
that if you are willing,
you can break all the boundaries
that even nature has fixed.
Not just your psychological boundaries,
not your emotional boundaries,
even existential boundaries that nature has fixed –
you can transcend all that.
So, the Guru Pournima
or the day of the guru
can also to be remembered as the day of liberation
because the possibility of liberation for the first time,
was opened up for human race.
Sadhguru: Now,
when you say or when you ask
if I am not the body,
if I am not the mind,
you’re making it hypothetical.
I am asking you,
is it a fact that you gathered this body?
Is it a fact?
Is it a fact all the content of your mind was gathered from outside?
Yes?
So what you gather cannot be you.
So there is no anything hypothetical about it,
it is definitely not you, isn’t it?
But do you still exist?
So what am I to say about it?
Now, so what you’re asking is
‘Who am I?’
Don’t ask me,
why do you ask me ‘Who am I?’
This happened in the Cincinnati airport,
you know in Ohio in United States.
People will… people had lined up to check in at the airline counter.
And one man came in a big rush,
jumped the line
came straight to the counter
thrust his ticket like this
and he wants to check in
The lady at the counter said,
‘Sir, there is a line,
please go stand in the line.’
He said, ‘No, I’m in a hurry.’
She said, ‘Well, everybody’s in a hurry.
You please stand in the line.’
Then he said,
‘Do you know who I am?’
An official like you
so she promptly picked up the microphone and said,
‘There is a man here who doesn’t know who he is,
can somebody help him?
Now you come and ask me who am I?
What am I to tell you?
Whatever I tell you will be just a nice
if I tell you,
‘You are an embodiment of the Divine.’
If you go and act out your Divine nature at home,
your wife will leave you
if you act too godly at home.
If you try this in your office,
you’ll get fired for sure,
or if you
if I tell you,
‘You are a no good nothing’
you won’t believe me.
If I tell you,
‘You are a drop of divinity that fell off Shiva’s lap
and here you are.’
Tell me what kind of story do you want?
A pleasant story, an unpleasant story,
I can tell you both.
I’m good at both
If I tell you an unpleasant story
you will not want to believe it,
if I tell you a pleasant story
you’ll become fanciful and lose all your sense.
But if you know it,
then it’s a different level of sense.
So, right now don’t bother,
don’t try to drop into a conclusion.
When you ask this question
what you’re trying to do is,
you want to arrive at a conclusion.
Don’t arrive at a conclusion.
Just seek,
what is not you let’s keep it aside.
If you keep all that is not you,
what is you must remain, isn’t it?
Hmm?
Yes or no?
What is not you, if it is removed,
what is you must remain, isn’t it,
where will it go?
That is, if you exist.
Suppose you don’t exist,
suppose you really do not exist,
at least that we must find out, isn’t it,
that I don’t exist.
Suppose you’re a Vedantin
and you believe you’re all maya,
at least that you must discover,
not believe what somebody said, isn’t it?
If you do not exist,
is it not very, very, very important that you find out that you do not exist?
Ah?
And if you do not even exist,
what the hell are you going through?
Why all the pain?
Why all the nonsense,
why all the rubbish of life,
when you don’t even exist.
Not worthwhile if you do not even exist, isn’t it?
Yes?
At least if you are in existence and you’re getting somewhere,
little pain on the way it doesn’t matter.
Yes?
You’re climbing the hill.
You’re going to reach the top of the hill,
on the way your knees are hurting, it’s okay,
but I’m gonna get there.
You’re not going to get anywhere just legs are paining,
you don’t want that, isn’t it?
And you don’t even exist but legs are paining,
do you want that?
For sure, you don’t want that.
So you must find out.
So this simple Isha Kriya is about
keeping aside whatever you are not.
What you are, I will not talk about it.
I don’t want to make a statement about you.
What you’re not, we want to remove.
What you are, let’s find out what you are.
Sadhguru:On a certain day
the pig went up to the cow
and said,
‘I know you give milk,
but I give pork.
Why is it that you are so much loved
and treated well and I’m not?’
The cow looked at the pig kindly and said,
‘I give milk when I’m alive and here.’
That’s the choice you have
whether you want to be a pork
or a milk-giving cow
you want to give when you’re alive
or people are waiting for you to be dead,
so that they can get what you have.
What shall I give
I don’t want to talk about
or I don’t want to tell anybody
what they should give,
but what’s precious to you,
that you must give.
Something that’s not precious to you if you give,
that’s not giving.
Whatever is precious to you,
what you value, that’s most
that’s what you must offer.
What is worthless with you
that’s what you give, that’s not the point.
That’s not giving.
That’s just cunning,
trying to buy a ticket to heaven.
If you go with this kind of mindset into the heaven,
we don’t know what the hell is there,
but one thing is for sure,
if it’s a good place it’ll mock at you.
I always find
when you have a filthy mind,
if you’re among people who are not like you,
it looks like everybody is mocking at you,
everybody is talking about you,
everybody is saying something about you right now.
This is the problem that people will suffer.
So, if… if heaven happens to be a good place
I have no intention of going there,
so I’ve never bothered to find out.
So if you’re trying to buy a ticket to the heaven with your goodness,
this kind of a tricky mind will suffer most
if that happens to be a good place
but if only your kind have gotten there,
you’ll suffer even more,
because you know how it’ll be
if there are ten people like you.
For every little bit they have a calculation.
If you live among people
where for everything there is a calculation,
if you’re one of them,
and you know how horrible it is to have ten like you?
Yes
So
to give that which is precious to you
what is most precious to a human being?
His own life,
his own self is what is most precious to him.
So one who chooses to give up himself or herself,
not what’s in his pocket,
not what is in his body,
not what is in his mind,
but himself.
Whatever is most precious,
if you know how to share that,
then
We don’t know about the people;
you’re longing for people’s attention,
you’re longing for people’s affection and love
because
you do not know
how to make all this trees fall in love with you,
you do not know
how to make the grass that you walk upon
to caress you tenderly and bless you,
the air that you breathe
to become one with you
the food that you eat, longing to get into you
and become you.
All this things are anyway happening,
the question is whether you are there to receive it or not?
Anyway it’s happening -
the food that you eat becomes a part of you,
air that you breathe keeps your life going,
what the tree exhales you inhale.
This is not a new phenomenon.
It is always there as a live process.
It is just that
are you there to receive it willingly,
consciously?
Then every breath becomes an ecstatic process for you
that you don’t have to seek attention and affection
and stand in a queue for tickets to heaven.
It doesn’t matter.
Even if you fall into a septic tink… tank,
don’t turn into a pig
which gives only when it’s dead.
To give when you’re well,
when you… to give when you’re alive,
to give when it matters to you,
that’s what is most important.
So should I give?
So I want to give,
I want to give,
giving is great!’
No, no, no,
I want you to understand.
There is nothing for you to give.
What the hell do you have to give?
If you sit here life is being given to you by charity,
free.
You just have to learn to receive.
What is there to give?
One who came with nothing in his hands,
what the hell can he give?
You can only take something from here and put it here,
take something from here and put it there,
take something from there and put it here
That’s all you can do.
Just putting it where it’s needed
that’s all you can do.
Did you come with an investment?
Hmm?
Are you a venture capitalist or something?
When you ventured into this planet,
did you come with your own investment?
Came with nothing.
So who the hell are you?
What can you give?
What do you have to give?
You can take one thing from one place and put it in another place.
Putting it in the right place
and receiving the bounty of joy and fulfillment of
putting things in the right place.
Everything that’s life,
everything that’s beauty,
everything that’s ecstatic
you can only receive, you cannot give.
If you learn to receive gracefully,
that’s the best giving.
People have always
made giving into a big deal
and they believe they’re giving.
The only thing that you can share,
that you can call sharing,
is yourself.
Everything else you picked up from the planet.
You pick it up here and if you leave it there,
is that giving?
That’s not giving.
That is just sensible living, that’s all.
The only and only thing if at all
if you can call as giving is
that you shared the very life within you.
This is the opportunity,
this is the privilege,
that the one who offer to everybody
that you have the possibility of sharing who you are,
because that’s the only giving,
that’s the only act that you can
reasonably term as ‘giving’.
Everything else is transportation.
No?
Just transportation, isn't it?
From here to there, there to here,
because you didn’t bring anything.
It’s always been here,
shifting places.
Something that you consider as yours
if you put it in their house,
their house also becomes yours.
Yes or no?
Yes, isn't it?
You can have the world
either you can try to have the world rather
by conquest
and nobody has managed that till now fortunately.
Not that it’s not possible;
possible,
but fortunately till now it’s not been possible.
Another way to take the world is by inclusion.
Sitting here you can make it yours.
This is a more intelligent way
and for sure a successful way of doing things.
If this whole world is yours by inclusion,
you know I’m letting all of you breathe,
eat,
do whatever you want,
this is giving.
Have the joy of giving
because it doesn’t matter,
all of you can live on my world,
no problem.
You can eat as much as you want,
no problem,
because we have no issue,
because you can’t take anything and escape.
Whatever you take after sometime you’ll put it back.
So what’s my problem?
You can live on my world, no problem.
Are you capable of taking something with you?
Hmm?
If you are that kind of a super thief
then even… we are even more happy with you
because you will take it somewhere
and that also will become ours
Now, this is not just playing with words.
This is the experience of a yogi.
A yogi means
one who sees the Existence as himself.
A union has happened.
This is the fundamental goal of yoga,
to achieve this union.
If you sit here, everything is one with you,
it is not even yours, it’s you.
Now you can give.
Everything is yours.
You can let them take.
Which is better?
You giving, giving, giving,
or you let them take what they want?
Let everybody take what they want.
We have no fear, they can use it,
and they’ll anyway put it back.
Some will use it gently,
some will use it in brash ways,
but they’ll all put it back.
Nobody is going to take it anywhere.
(Sadhguru): Health is a very funny thing the way it is understood today in the world.
There are very few health professionals,
there are only medical professionals;
people learn medicine, not health.
Over 15,000 years ago,
when Adi Yogi appeared in the upper regions of Himalayas,
when people sought him to know the way of life,
the first thing that he taught them
and the most fundamental thing which he taught them was
what is today referred to as bhutashuddhi,
that means cleansing the five elements within the system.
Bhutashuddhi, if practiced properly,
leads to what we refer to as bhuta siddhi,
or a certain mastery over the five elements.
This comes from the understanding,
this comes from the basis
that if you want to build a clean building
you just have to take care of the building material properly.
If the building material is not pure,
is not of good quality,
the building that you build,
the structure that you build is bound to be of an inferior quality.
These are technologies for well-being,
because we never considered body as a
the whole of our life,
we always saw body as something that we will discard at a certain moment.
Our sense of well-being was not limited to the physicality of life,
so the focus was always on the inner well-being,
which would naturally lead to the physical well-being of a human being.
So I keep asking people,
if you have any problem with your body,
first of all to understand from where the body was made.
If you as much as eat a banana,
this banana goes inside and becomes a human being.
So there is a certain level of
intelligence and competence and capability here (Referring to oneself)
which is capable of making a… a human being out of a banana
that level of intelligence and competence exists here.
So the very creation of this body happens from within.
When this body is being created from inside,
when we know that the very source of creation of this body is within us,
if you have a repair job to be done,
would you like to go to the manufacturer or to the local mechanic?
Most people are choosing to go to the local mechanic;
that is not because that is what they want to do,
that is because they have lost the access to the manufacturer.
The infrastructure both in physical terms and in human terms necessary
to bring this technology of inner well-being to the people
has unfortunately been obliterated
in the last 200 to 300 years of external rule in the country,
Wherever you want to
Wherever people… human habitations lived,
there were places where medicine grew and people just had to access it,
they didn’t have to go to a shop and buy it,
they didn’t have to be treated by somebody
because almost everybody knew what to do with themselves.
what your grandmothers knew about their health and well-being
and today the generation that is here,
for every little thing they need a pill or an injection or whatever else,
how it has changed in a matter of 50 years.
This happened to me when I was about 20… years of age.
On a certain day I was playing field hockey and I broke my ankle.
I know what it means
I know what is a fractured bone
because by then I had broken it many times,
so I did not need a doctor to diagnose
and tell me this bone is broken.
When a bone is broken, I know it's broken. (Laughs)
So my ankle was ballooning up and I limped to the side of the hockey field and just sat there.
Other boys were still continuing to play and they were raising lot of dust.
I sat there in extreme pain and my leg had swollen up that way
and this dust and this pain together, somehow I couldn’t breathe, I was suffocating,
I could not breathe for some time
and became like a… I was wheezing for breath,
I was struggling to breathe, gasping for breathe.
I have been meditating and doing things till then,
so suddenly this thought came to me,
‘If the very source of creation is within me,
why is it that I can’t fix this little breath,
why is it that I can’t fix this broken bone?’
I sat there for about an hour and a quarter with my eyes closed
and when I opened my eyes my breath was perfectly okay and it’s been perfectly okay since then
and above all, my broken leg was perfectly fine.
The swelling had gone down and it was quite good.
I was feeling a little pain in the muscle but my bone was perfectly all right.
So I was really… couldn’t believe it.
I stood up and I did not know whether it would support me or not,
but I was quite fine.
Then I got on to my motorcycle and, you know,
you had to kick start with your left leg, and which I did,
and I was fine.
It is from that moment that I started really looking
and this whole technologies for inner well-being,
what we are offering today as Inner Engineering,
essentially came from that experience,
that something as
as physical, not like an ailment,
as physical as a broken bone,
actually in about an hour and a quarter it was fully fixed for me
and it became perfectly all right for me.
And armed with this experience I started experimenting with myself in so many ways
and arrived at various things
and today that is what we’re propagating as Inner Engineering process.
Announcer: In today’s event
three of our students will be in conversation with Sadhguru
on the theme of youth and truth.
This is the first event in this series
in which Sadhguru will be in conversation with students
on the theme of youth and truth.
I now request Ishan, Saksham and Om Prakash to come on the stage (Applause).
Ishan is a final year dual degree computer science student,
Saksham is a third year engineering Physics student
and Om Prakash is a final year M.Tech mechanical engineering student (Applause).
Now I hand it over to Sadhguru and the students
to begin the conversation.
Sadhguru: Namaskaram to everyone.
Speaker: Good evening, everyone.
First of all I would like to extend a very warm welcome to Sadhguru to IIT.
It’s a very rare occasion for us as a institute to have you here.
So before we begin the conversation
I would just like to put it in context,
so when we got to know about Sadhguru coming to IIT
we were thinking of
how would it be appropriate to be able to represent of the thoughts of the community
in the limited time by limited number of people
so we thought of the idea of crowd sourcing the questions
so we crowd sourced the question to everyone
and people responded with a lot of questions
and we had a hard time compiling them.
So we prepared a cocktail of questions after crowd sourcing
and we’ve tried to represent all the different themes that are asked.
So just beginning with the conversation
I’d like to start with a very silly and yet existential and fundamental question.
So given that we are here on this planet for a limited life,
given that we are human, we would not live forever,
so what do you think is the wise way
to spend the years on this planet (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: I know what
Can you hear me?
I know what all the professors would like me to say (Laughter/Applause).
The wise is way is you must be focused on your academics,
that’s all the concern is but
we must look at this.
All life on this planet,
anything that you take,
a worm,
an insect,
a bird,
an animal,
a tree
or a human being,
the only thing that every life is aspiring for is
it is trying to become a full-fledged life.
An earthworm is trying to be an full-fledged earthworm,
a grasshopper is trying to be a full-fledged grasshopper,
a mango tree is trying to be a full-fledged mango tree,
so is a human being.
Only thing is we know what is a full-fledged earthworm,
we know what is a full-fledged grasshopper,
we know what is a full-fledged everything
but we do not know what is a full-fledged human being.
Doesn’t matter what you do
somehow seems inadequate.
No matter where you get in your life
you will see there is one more thing to do.
Never does a human being come to a place
where he thinks this is it.
That only other people say when you’re dead,
this is it (Laughter).
So
the essential nature of life not just human life,
every life is
it is longing to become a full-fledged life,
so is a human being.
So wherever you may be in your life right now
you want to be something more.
If that something more happens
you want to be something more.
If that happens something more.
You will see whatever your aspirations right now
as students suppose
all of them get fulfilled within the next one year,
you will immediately see you will have another aspiration.
If everything that you want gets all fulfilled by tomorrow morning
you will see you will have much more things to do
because the very nature of being human is such
you always want to be something more.
But if you really look at it
what you want is not something more,
what you want is a limitless expansion.
Even if I make you the king of this planet
Don’t look at me hopefully (Laughter),
I will not make such a blunder (Laughter).
But suppose we make you the king of this planet,
do you believe you will be fulfilled?
You will look at the stars.
If you have this planet in your hands
you will look at the stars.
If I give you one galaxy you will look at the next galaxy –
this is the nature of the human being.
There is something within us
which is always longing to become boundless.
But in most human beings
because of their fear of suffering
they think that if they desire for something and it doesn’t happen they will suffer.
Because of the fear of suffering
this longing to become boundless is finding a very constipated expression.
This constipated expression of longing for the boundless
gets labeled as ambition.
What you think is ambition is just a constipated expression
for a boundless expansion that every life is longing for.
But you will see in your life
no matter what happens
you will see you will want something more.
This somebody may label it as greed.
It is not about greed
because the very nature of the human being is such
no matter how many pacifists’ philosophies you teach him
you cannot contain him.
People have told you,
you must be happy with what you have,
whatever god has given you that should be the right thing for you
but it’s not worked for one human being on this planet.
It only works either when you’re very sick or very old (Laughs)
otherwise if you have little energy coursing through your body
you want to do something more.
So it’s not more,
a human being
There is something within you which doesn’t like boundaries.
If I imprison you in a five-by-five cubicle
you will feel terribly imprisoned.
Then we will liberate you tomorrow into a ten-by-ten cubicle.
You will feel wonderful for a day
but again you will feel imprisoned.
The next day we will release you into a hundred-by-hundred cubicle,
you will feel really great
but in three days again you’ll want to break that boundary.
It doesn’t matter where I set the boundary,
the moment you become conscious of the boundary
you want to break that boundary,
this is the nature of the human being.
So there is something within you
which does not like boundaries.
So if you do not like boundaries
what should you seek, that’s a question.
As long as you live in the physical nature of the existence
The very nature of physicality is a defined boundary.
Only because there is a defined boundary physical is possible.
We can call this a physical body
because it has boundaries.
If I pull out all the boundaries
this will not be physical anymore.
So somewhere unconsciously
every human being is wanting to touch a dimension beyond physical nature.
If you touch a dimension beyond the physical nature
then we use the much maligned and corrupted word called Spirituality.
Spiritual means not looking up or looking down,
spiritual means your experience of life has transcended
the limitations of being physical.
Something more than physical is happening to you,
this means you are on the spiritual process.
So this longing is there in every human being
so essentially it doesn’t… What you do in your life,
our activity is not about us,
activity is about the world that we live in.
Today you are here in twenty first century so you guys are in IIT.
Suppose you were here 5000 years ago where would you be?
Speaker: In a jungle.
Sadhguru: Hmm? No, no (Laughter).
You know, 5000 years ago they were talking Mahabharata, Ramayan
so you would be in one of those armies trying to shoot a arrow (Gestures) (Laughter).
Hey, you can’t shoot anything (Laughter).
You were trying to learn to fight with somebody in a sword or something else of the day.
I’m saying your mind,
your application,
your fulfillment in activity would be all that type of activity relevant to the times.
Our activity is always about the times in which we exist,
it’s not about us really.
What times do we exist,
what is most needed right now, that’s what we do.
But how to be is the question.
If it comes to how to be
there’s only one way to be
that somewhere in every human being there is a longing
to expand beyond physical limitations.
This is happening in four different ways.
If it finds a very basic physical expression we call this sexuality.
You are trying to expand the boundary of who you are.
What you are not you are trying to include as yourself,
this is what sexuality is.
If it finds an emotional expression we call this love.
Once again something that is not you,
you are trying to make it a part of you.
If it finds a mental expression it gets labeled as
ambition,
greed,
conquest
or simply shopping (Laughter).
If it finds a conscious process then we call it yoga.
Yoga means not twisting your body or turning your body,
yoga means union.
In some way consciously you learn
how to obliterate the boundaries of your individual nature,
now your ability to experience yourself beyond your physical existence
has become a living reality for you.
This is everybody’s longing
but it finds constipated expression.
Instead of that if you find a conscious expression,
life will be very, very different.
Speaker: So you said that it’s a very continuous journey of expansion and
like having this conscious expression would make it very different
but this is very easier said than done,
so like doing it is a journey all together.
So if I’m on this journey
so I’d have personal aspirations,
I’d have spiritual aspirations
but there’s also a conflict with the societal life that I live in.
There are responsibilities on me from my family,
there are some social boundations that I have
while trying to be limitless.
So how do I cope with this conflict?
Or in fact I’d like to ask that
is it even possible that we are able to draw a synthesis between the two?
Sadhguru: You are talking like a much married man (Laughter/Applause).
This is usually a diplomatic way of saying I’m married (Laughter).
See, we need to understand this,
though everybody is thinking they are shaping their own lives and whatever,
the human longing to expand is not your doing,
this is the nature of life itself.
It’s not something that I aspire for a spiritual process,
there’s no such thing.
Every human being is longing for expansion,
will they long for it consciously or unconsciously
that’s all the choice is.
Anyway every human being is longing for expansion.
Even the beggar on the street is looking for little expansion of his territory, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
So wanting to expand is not your doing or my doing,
this is the nature of life,
it’s invested in us.
Now what we are doing in the world today
is just a question of the times in which we exist.
Okay, we have little choices,
whether you want to do art, music or engineering or medicine or
something like this but essentially all this activities
are supposed to be for human well-being, isn’t it?
So fundamentally there’s only one business of human well-being,
the question is
what is your competence?
What is the nature of your, you know,
intelligence so that how you could be most useful so you will choose that.
This does not determine.
You doing an engineering program or a medical program or an art program
should not decide the nature of who you are,
that only decides the nature of your activity,
not the nature of who you are.
Speaker: So continuing with this
what is the role of a guru in a person’s journey (Sadhguru laughs)?
How do we students or as people over here,
how do we find a guru
and how do we know that, that person is actually
a guru is actually leading us to the correct path?
Sadhguru: If he confuses the hell out of you
and you still like him, he’s your guru
(Laughter/Applause).
If somebody is trying to help you to find certainty
in an uncertain world
he is not your guru,
he is trying to sing a lullaby to you, you understand?
The nature of life is such
that every moment it is changing and evolving into something else
but somebody tries to create certainty,
Don’t worry, god will take care of you.
God is holding your hand,
everything will be fine,
everything will be fine.
They’ve been saying this for a long time
but life has buggered people very badly in so many ways.
Yes
So this is not about inventing
a psychological certainty
and getting completely delinked from the reality of the existence.
The nature of the existence is such
nothing can be stagnant here.
It is only the dynamic nature from atomic to cosmic
that is keeping the existence going
including the human being and every other life.
So a guru is not somebody who’ll give you solace.
He is a solution because
the only reason why you may need him is
because it’s an unfamiliar terrain.
See, every year I trek in the Himalayas,
Indian part or generally now in Nepal and Tibet,
there this Sherpa guy who leads me on.
Well, your lungs will be in your mouth,
you are at eighteen thousand feet
and your lungs is in your mouth
and you’re determined,
you’re going step-by-step,
they’re two roads, this looks nice and easy,
this guy says (Gestures).
He won’t say,
Sadhguru ji, please, this is the way (Laughter).
No, (Gestures) (Laughter).
He’s carrying my bags and he’s illiterate
but he says (Gestures) like this.
Without argument I follow.
Though this looks better to me I just follow
because I know he knows the terrain better than me.
I know the mountains very well
but still I know he knows it better than me.
Once I recognize that it is sensible to follow him.
If you do your own thing you won’t last.
The same thing goes with the inner terrain.
When you go into a terrain that’s unfamiliar to you,
it’s best to go with somebody who’s already walked the terrain
otherwise to find your neighborhood
you may round the planet and come back,
that is also one way
but it’s a brief life (Laughs).
Speaker: So I want to bring to a different theme
Sadhguru: Why you… Why are you copying questions (Laughter)?
Speaker: I just wanted to
Sadhguru: I’ve seen people copying answers but (Laughter).
Speaker: As students a lot of us
especially in institute like IIT
we did a survey and we found that
a lot of students are under stress
and we’re used to a reward and punishment mechanism.
So till the time there’s no sword hanging on us,
till the time there’s no deadline,
we’ll procrastinate and we’ll wait for things to happen
and that’s when we do.
And when we talked to students
they say that, This is the way we know how to work,
this is the way we are trained.
And related this many of them say that fear of failure
sometimes motivates them.
And they say that this is essential
and this is how things have to happen.
Is that so that this is only way we can work
or because it sometimes makes us feel very restricted.
Is there a way where we can be free of this?
Sadhguru: See, let’s understand this in a more fundamental way.
See, when we say stress,
when we say anxiety,
when we say depression,
when we say misery or
when we say joy,
when we say bliss,
when we say ecstasy or love or whatever,
all human experience comes from within you.
Is this so, all of you?
I’m asking for a higher opinion (Referring to people sitting on the top) (Laughter).
Is this so?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: All human experience happens from within you.
At least what happens from within you must happen the way you want it.
Yes or no?
Now you are still in a university,
once you step out into the larger world. Tch,
this is a very protected world that you’re living in,
if this you’re thinking sword is hanging on your head
you’ll have a bomb ticking (Laughter)
once you step out.
This is a very comfortable life,
very protected life,
here nothing is hanging on you,
okay. Yes,
you need to pass your examinations, whatever,
there are some challenges I’m not saying no.
But all human experience happens from within.
Whatever comes from within you
can I assume that you are doing it?
If something sweet comes out of you right now can I assume you are saying something sweet?
Something nasty comes out of you can I assume you’re saying it?
Speaker: Yes.
Sadhguru: Or is it your ego (Laughter)?
Speaker: I think the ego then.
Sadhguru: Because this has become the way of the world,
people have found all kinds of fall guys –
spiritual fall guys
and civil fall guys.
If they do something wonderful they say it’s me,
if they do something nasty they say it’s that Mr. Ego,
that guy does this.
If they do something wonderful in the world they say it’s me,
something go… little goes wrong in their life
they’ll find one little guy here
and say it’s because of him.
If something big goes wrong in their life
they’ll find one big guy there and say it’s because of him (Laughter).
This (Referring to oneself) guy is missing.
This guy needs to come into the play.
Only when this guy comes into play you call that life.
Yes?
When this guy play this is called life.
If that guy plays I don’t know what it means,
this guy plays,
this is rubbish.
Everything that goes on in my life
somebody who can’t stand up to me he’s responsible.
Something big goes wrong in my life, he’s responsible,
this one is missing.
One who is missing
how can he experience life,
how can he create life,
how can he know life?
So this guy has to come into play.
So one important thing that needs to happen in the world today is
we have to move from religion to responsibility
Applause
We have been slinking around with life.
When things happen I’m there
when it don’t happen, somewhere, somewhere.
No,
if you understand it’s me who is causing anxiety to myself
not my examination.
When I joined the institution I know there are going to be examinations, isn’t it?
What is causing anxiety is not something else,
my inability to handle my own thought and my emotion, isn’t it?
If it so happened
your left hand is free right now,
your left hand is free,
suppose it pops up and punches you in the face,
what will you do (Gestures) (Laughter)?
I will ask him to restrain the left hand (Laughter).
If it doesn’t work
we’ll ask them to tie it up.
If it doesn’t work at all,
if it’s going to pull out your eyeballs
then we may have to amputate it.
Yes or no?
Right now that is all you’re trying to do.
To beat the anxiety you’ll drown yourself in alcohol,
to beat the anxiety you burn yourself down with smoke.
What you’re trying to do is
amputate yourself
because you don’t know how to handle the potential of being human.
Your problem is very evolutionary.
When I say evolutionary,
see, do you know –
I mean you’re all engineering students
so I’m asking do you know
do you know the DNA difference between you and a chimpanzee is only 1.23 percent?
1.23 percent is not much of a difference, isn’t it (Laughter)?
Yes or no?
Physiologically that is how close to a chimpanzee you are.
But in terms of your intelligence,
intellect and awareness
you are worlds apart from a chimpanzee.
Or in other words
your intellect or this cerebral activities
in evolutionary scale it’s of recent origin,
it’s new.
You’ve still not learned how to deal with it.
You have an intelligence
for which you don’t have a stable enough base.
The only and only reason
you suffer either misery or anxiety or depression or whatever –
this may sound very cruel to you
but the reality is this,
that your own intelligence has turned against you.
It is like you’ve been given a sharp knife,
you don’t know how to handle it,
every day you keep cutting yourself
and you think there is something wrong with the knife.
No,
you don’t have steady hand.
If your intelligence worked for you one hundred percent
would you create blissfulness or misery for yourself?
Joy or misery
please chose right now
I’m going to bless you (Laughter).
Participants: Joy.
Sadhguru: For yourself you clearly know
highest level of pleasantness is what you want.
What you want for your neighbor is debatable,
what you want for yourself is very, very clear, isn’t it?
So you create ghosts of you own
and try to fight them.
Can I tell you a joke?
You okay (Laughter)?
No, because you’re from Delhi I’m asking you (Laughter).
An Indian man
probably from an IIT (Laughter)
went to United States
of course as a technology person to start with.
Then he started dabbling with some investments,
then he started playing the stock market,
in 1996 I think,
four or six I’m not sure,
in one of those years he had a windfall in the American stock market.
That year he earned the highest amount of money on the US stock market
which is not a small amount,
it’s a huge sum.
He was already over sixty years of age,
just the previous year he was divorced -
timely divorced it happened
because in California law
you have to share fifty percent with the wife.
Just one year ahead of this windfall the wife had left him
(Laughter).
And he wanted to spend this money upon himself
so he bought himself a 1932 Ferrari
for thirty-six million dollars.
He bought a Beverly Hills home for eighty million dollars.
Then he was over sixty,
he wants to live long
so he thought he needs a medical checkup.
In northern California
there are medical institutions which are swankier than seven star hotels
and you can go there.
Not some dreary medical checkup, in one day, everything,
fifteen days you can get admitted for a fortnight
and you can choose your tests unlike you,
you can’t choose your tests (Laughter).
You can choose your tests,
all kinds of esoteric tests are there,
you can choose what kind of tests you want to go through.
So the entire space was nice,
the appointed a very pretty looking young woman to take care of him,
he was enjoying the entire process.
On the fourth day he was feeling very relaxed in the evening
and he was lying on his bed,
unfortunately what should happen in the toilet
happened upon the bed.
He felt very embarrassed
and he did not know how to handle this mess.
Not knowing how to hand this mess
he was just looking how to do this,
just then he heard this young woman coming towards the room.
In America fortunately
young ladies don’t
cannot walk quietly,
they walk tok, tok, tok, tok (Laughter).
So when he heard this tok, tok, tok,
she knows… he knows she is coming.
He does not want this young lady to see the mess on the bed.
So he just gathered all the hospital white sheets
and threw it out of the fifth floor window.
Down below a regular man was going home from a party
(Laughter).
And it’s such an unfair world (Laughter)
because a man is expected to walk on a round planet
and the damn thing is spinning all the time,
this you realize only when you have had a few m… few drops too many or
few drops between your ears are gone (Laughs).
So he was walking sideways and slowly finding his way home.
Then these sheets came and covered him (Laughter).
Then he screamed and yelled and fought with these sheets.
It took him over two minutes to get the sheets down.
Then the sheets got down and he was looking at the sheets dazed.
The security arrived hearing all this commotion,
they said, “What is all the commotion about?”
The man said
it looks like I’ve beaten the shit out of a ghost”
(Laughter/Applause).
So it’s your thought.
What happens in your mind is your thought, isn’t it?
It’s your emotion
unfortunately.
Unfortunately our education systems from an early age
have not thought you this much,
how to handle your thought,
how to handle your emotion. Tch,
if you did not know how to handle your hands
it would be a mess, isn’t it?
This you will know if you come to Tamil Nadu,
you will suddenly realize
Tamil people can use their fingers far better than you.
That is, on a banana leaf they will put rice and rasam,
you will see it’ll go all over the place (Laughter)
but they won’t let a drop go anywhere,
in two minutes it’ll be dry
just with their fingers (Laughter).
So everybody can get to use
what they have much better
than the way they’re handling it right now, isn’t it?
If you knew how to handle your thought and emotion
would you think anxiety is a problem,
would you think stress is a problem,
tension is a problem,
would you think such things would exist for you?
So essentially it is our inability to handle our own thought process,
our own emotions
that all this is happening.
Instead of learning to handle it
we are giving labels to all our inabilities,
all kinds of exotic titles for ourselves.
No,
this is not the way to go about it.
I am telling you this is the easiest part of your life,
being in a protected institution like this,
getting the best of academics
and you just have to pass an examination,
that’s all.
Once you step out it’s another game (Laughs).
Speaker: You said that this is the easiest part of your life as a student
but we see that a lot of youngsters fall into the clutches of stress,
depression
and to cope with that they go to the addictions like alcohol, drug, porn, internet etcetera
and they think that it will give them relief.
Sadhguru: I didn’t know internet was along with the drugs (Laughter).
Speaker: So how to deal with them?
Sadhguru: Look at me, I’m always stoned
(Laughter/Applause).
Never been on a substance
but you must understand
whatever stimulants
whatever stimulus you may take from outside
essentially human experience of all kinds
is caused only from within.
The question is only
are you on push-start or are you on self-start?
Which is better technologically?
Participants: Self-start.
Sadhguru: Self-start.
So if I teach you,
suppose I teach you
that you can simple sit here and be totally blissed out,
more stoned than anybody on the campus (Laughter),
at the same time you’re fully aware,
would you go for it?
Hmm?
Would you go for it?
Fully stoned,
fully conscious,
would you go for it?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: See the only problem with your alcohol, drugs, everything
is not a moral issue,
it is a life issue because it destroys life.
It’s not a morality that
this is good, this is bad, that’s not the point.
The point is it makes you incapable in so many ways.
There was a certain Israeli scientist
who was researching on marijuana or cannabis.
Over eighteen years
the US drug and… drug administration gave him large quantities of marijuana
and he went on experimenting and eighteen years’ time
he came up with really nothing significant
and during mid-eighties when American agencies were fighting drug on the street,
they changed their policy of
fighting the suppliers in Mexico and South America,
they decided to fight on the street
with the users.
So they said
somebody said this is not right,
you’re giving this man such a big stock,
we don’t know what he is doing
because he had not produced anything,
eighteen years of research.
Then he moved to Israel,
the Israeli government looked at his work
and they decided to give him
big stocks of marijuana.
And after another three-and-a-half, four years he came up with this,
he found that in the human brain
there are millions of cannabis receptors.
Then he threw this question to various disciplines.
Anthropologist tried to look at it and say
at some time in history
maybe every human being was smoking that’s why the receptors.
Then they said this is rubbish
because in many parts of the world it was not there.
Even a Eskimo has cannabis receptors
where he has never seen anything like this.
Then various things happened
then the neurologists came up with this,
they said always the human brain is waiting for the cannabis,
that which causes intoxication.
Not waiting for it from outside,
it can generate from within
that is why there are receptors.
So this is something that we have always known.
I can show you –
I’m there always
but you look at my eyes,
I’m always stoned
but as aware as anybody can be.
If you do not know intoxication in life
you will never know a sense of abandon.
If you don’t have a sense of abandon
you will never walk full stride in your life,
you will only walk half steps all the time.
Only when there is no fear of suffering
because you’re highly intoxicated and fully aware
not because you consumed substances
which will take away your awareness,
simply because you’re keeping the system,
the human mechanism at its highest function,
now it is fully self-sufficient,
blissed out all the time,
now you will not think of all these things.
I’m
I want you to look all young people,
I want you to look at this.
In your life would you like to do that which works
or that which does not work?
Hmm?
Participants: Multiple answers
Sadhguru: Human intelligence is always looking for that which works, isn’t it?
That which does not work is not what we’re interested in,
that which works.
When… I’m… I’m just wondering
how far to take you,
you look like a nice boy (Laughter).
This is
It is just this,
every experience,
whatever happens to you –
right now let’s look at it this way.
Right now all of you,
those who are in the upper regions also,
do you see me?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Even if you’re not listening,
do you see me (Laughter)?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you see me
can you use one of your hands and point out where I am?
Tch,, tch, tch,
you also?
Oh, you got it wrong,
you know I’m a mystic (Laughter)
from southern India (Laughs).
So today you know this light is falling upon me,
reflecting, going through your lenses,
inverted image in the retina,
you know the entire story, isn’t it?
So you see me within yourself,
you hear me within yourself.
Where have you seen the whole world?
Within yourself.
The way it is projected in the firmament of your mind
you are not seeing the world it is,
you are saying it the way it’s projected within you.
A grasshopper may not be seeing the world the way you see it,
he is seeing it differently.
Yes or no?
Same world but he sees… sees it differently
because his visual apparatus are made completely different.
You know that different animals hear,
some hear subsonic sound,
some hear ultrasonic sound,
we… we don’t hear both of them.
Yes?
We hear something else.
So we are all living in the same world
but seeing and hearing things completely differently.
What is day for us,
what is light for us is darkness for some other creature.
What is darkness for them is light for us,
obviously our instruments of perception
are created for our survival process
and their instruments for survival are crafted for their survival process
but now your intelligence has blossomed to a place
where survival is not good enough,
you want to know the nature of life.
Once this longing comes
then you must understand
the instruments of perception need to be in enhanced.
These instruments
five senses of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching,
they are not good enough
because they are only instruments of survival,
they are not instruments of true knowing
because they show you everything in comparison.
When I say everything in comparison,
right now if you’re six feet tall,
you stand like a tall man,
you walk like a tall man,
you think like a tall man,
you are a tall man.
You went to another society where everybody is eight feet tall,
suddenly you stand like a short man,
walk like a short man, think like a short man,
you are a short man, isn’t it (Laughter)?
I’m saying what you know in comparison is only good for survival process not to know the nature of life.
So right now everything that you know is only by comparison.
If I touch this I feel it’s cool.
No, that’s not the reality.
The reality is because my body temperature is in a certain way
I make a judgment that this is cool.
Suppose I lower my body temperature substantially
and then I touch this,
this would be warm to me.
Yes or no?
So what you’re perceiving is only by comparison.
What you know by comparison is just a distortion of reality.
It is good enough for survival,
it is not good enough to know the nature of life.
Now you’re talking about stress and anxiety
As I said
every year we’ve been trekking in Himalayas.
Two years ago
I’m in a tent somewhere in Nepal
and I’m doing some work.
Someone else is cutting an apple –
there’s another person in the tent,
that person tells this person,
“Be careful, it’s a very sharp knife.”
It irritates me
because I call something a knife only if it’s sharp,
what about you (Laughter)?
I call something as knife only if it’s really sharp otherwise
I will call it a screw driver (Laughs).
I look at this and then I continue my work.
And another two minutes
again it is said,
“Be careful, it’s a very sharp knife.”
I say, Come on, leave the man alone.
If it’s a child yes, but this is full-grown man,
he knows how to handle a knife,
not a complicated machinery.
“No, Sadhguru, it’s a very sharp knife” (Laughter).
Then I continued my work.
Another two minutes I hear a whisper,
“Be careful, it’s a very sharp knife” (Laughter).
Another two minutes he cuts his hand,
then I give up (Laughter).
Why I’m saying this to you is knife is not a sharp instrument,
a knife is not dangerous instrument.
Every day in the world
both in terms of kitchens and operation theaters
tell me are knifves saving more lives or taking more lives?
Saving more lives.
In an irresponsible hand it may take somebody’s life.
Knife is not dangerous,
it is in whose hands it is,
what kind of hand is it which makes it dangerous.
Knife is not a dangerous instrument.
Yes or no?
Only if an unsteady hand is handling,
if a child holds a knife,
we say, be careful, be careful
because not because knife is dangerous
because the hand is not steady.
Right now this is the situation,
compared to every other creature on the planet
your intellect is little sharper than them –
would you like to have a sharp intellect or a dull one?
Speaker: Sharp.
Sadhguru: Sharp.
If you want a sharp intellect you must learn to hold it right otherwise
every day you start poking,
this is self-help (Few laugh), you know.
When was the last time somebody stabbed you with a dagger in the.
When was the last time somebody stabbed you with a dagger (Laughter)?
Even in Delhi it doesn’t happen (Laughter).
Maybe somebody poked you with a pin at the most when you were in school.
Or maybe they ignored you,
they did not even do that (Laughter).
So what I’m saying is
how much suffering is actually coming from outside,
miniscule, isn’t it?
Rest is all self-help.
So once your intelligence turns against you,
believe me no force in the universe can save you.
So it’s very important
before you do anything else in your life
you learn to bring your body and mind to a state
where your body take instructions from you,
your mind takes instructions from you.
They must serve you,
you should not be serving them,
otherwise you will live a very poor life,
very poor life
because you can only live a life of some significance
only when your mind and your body works for you
not against you, isn’t it?
At least this much every human being should take charge of.
Speaker: Sadhguru, I speak to my friends around here
and whenever we talk about meditation or yoga,
they say, “Ah, that’s for the old people,
that’s not for us
and we’re not very interested in it.’
And one of my friends said,
“I tried meditating and I slept.”
So why is it that meditation and yoga is perceived
as something for the old and not for the young generation?
“We don’t need this.”
Sadhguru: Maybe because
that is the kind of people they have met (Laughter)
in the sense
yoga means they saw all yogis
who fell out of the calendars,
printed in Shiva Kashi, you know, in South India
(Laughter),
all right?
They thought yoga means you’re not interested in life,
that’s a general thing.
I am doing everything possible to change this perception,
many things.
This is not for anything
because you’re young people I’m saying.
Something physical you learn,
let’s say you learn to ride a dirt bike,
let’s say you learn to do sky diving,
let’s say you learn to fly a helicopter,
let’s say you learn to ski,
do something.
What you may take three years or five years to learn
I will do it in three months at this age.
Would you like to do that at an early age
or when you’re dying,
I’m asking you?
Participants: Early age.
Sadhguru: Then you must do yoga (Laughs) (Applause).
I will tell you
I got into yoga for all the wrong reasons (Laughs)
but that is the beauty of life,
even for wrong reasons if you do the right thing it works.
I was just eleven, twelve years of age,
every summer vacation
we go to our grandfather’s ancestral home
where in the backyard there is a well
which is about eight feet in diameter,
about hundred-and-fifty feet in depth.
Water generally in summer will be
at least sixty, seventy feet below the ground level.
So one of the sport for us young boys is to jump into this well and climb up.
When you jump you have to go properly
otherwise your brains will become a smear on the wall.
And to come up there is no step,
there is no foothold, nothing,
just holding the rock you have to climb.
I remember just the sheer pressure,
my weight
I was not very heavy
but still my weight on just two fingers and three fingers like this,
my nails would bleed out of sheer pressure not injury
just hanging onto the rock like that with claws.
But I would do that
and I’m very proud that I’m good at it.
One day a man who is over seventy years age
simply standing there silently watching us.
We ignored him
because seventy means for us he was dead (Laughter).
Not now, okay (Laughter/Applause).
Perspective of life will change, you know (Laughter).
At that time seventy means he’s gone.
But without a word
this man who was over seventy-two years of age at that time,
he just walked to the well and jumped,
I thought he’s finished (Laughter)
but he came up faster than me.
I didn’t like it.
Then I asked,
how?
He said, “Come, do yoga.”
Like a puppy I went behind him (Laughter).
Because I found him so super human
that he could do things that no young man could do.
So I got into yoga for all the wrong reasons.
See it doesn’t matter how you get in,
which door you enter from it doesn’t matter
as long as you do the right thing it works.
Essentially what yoga means is this
You use a cell phone?
What?
Samsung,
iPhone?
Speaker: Yes, a Samsung (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Tch, you didn’t use the seven (Laughter).
So if you have a cellphone
is it true or any gadget,
the more you know about it
the better you can use it.
Is it so?
Yes or no?
That’s what your entire engineering is about,
to know more about everything
so that you can use it better, make it better, isn’t it?
Why is that not true with this?
The more you know about this,
the better you can use it.
Anyway of all the
gadgets that you find on this planet
is this (Referring to oneself)
the most sophisticated mechanism on the planet?
Do you agree with me?
If you don’t agree with me then something wrong with you
(Laughter).
This is the most sophisticated mechanism on the planet, isn’t it?
Why is it that you have not paid attention
as to see
what are all the intricacies of what this is.
What this means is
you haven’t read the user’s manual
but you want to blunder into the world,
so just education is becoming stress.
If you want to create something in the world
you will see so many more challenges.
So education which is a simplest process of all,
that is becoming stress,
this is simply because
you have not read the user’s manual at all,
simply (Gestures), Samsung,
we don’t know what’ll happen.
You must learn how to use it,
similarly this (Referring to oneself).
So if you know perfectly well how to use this
then we say you’re self-realized.
Self-realized does not mean you went to heaven,
you know this (Referring to oneself) perfectly well,
you know everything, the range of things this can do.
This is all I know in my life.
I know this piece of life from its origin to its ultimate.
People think I know everything,
that’s their problem,
I know only this (Laughter).
Speaker: So, there’s a lot of talk about our country,
India these days.
Even in the world platforms we see that the things are improving.
But going to the past of the India
if we see the history of world’s civilizations
we see that India particularly stands out very clearly
when it comes to developing ways of
this self-experiential ways of realizing this inner truth about ourselves
or knowing the body and the higher truths through self-experiential ways.
So what do you think was it that
we were able to do properly that
we were able to discover these things
and not just that,
we were not just able to discover
but also proliferate them into the social eco-system.
What was it that led us into this?
Sadhguru: Essentially a long spell of peaceful, civilized life -
a long spell.
You must understand this,
the reason why we got this long spell is
in the north we were protected by the Himalayan ranges,
in the south by the Indian ocean.
So this is Himalaya,
the Indian Ocean that we call today as the India Ocean
at that time it was called as the Indu Sagara.
This is why we took the identity “Hi” and “Du” Hindu.
Hindu is not a religion,
not belief system,
not a god oriented thing,
it is a geographical identity.
Unfortunately it’s turned into many things today
that’s a different thing.
So we identified with these two geographical features
because we realized
it’s only because of these features that
we had an undisturbed civilization growing
without any external agencies coming and disturbing us.
When there is a long spell for a human being
where he doesn’t have to fight for his survival on a daily basis,
that is when human genius flowers -
in many ways human genius flowered.
We produced the greatest mathematician,
greatest astronomers,
greatest musicians,
all kinds of people
and many technologies which we refused to use
simply because we foresaw if you go this way what will happen to the world,
various other things.
If you look back at the glorious history of this country
it is simply because –
which is true even today.
See you can build a great society
or a great nation
or a great world
not by talking about it,
only by building individual human beings
who are truly great.
Without great human beings where is a great society?
Society is just a word,
nation is just a word,
world is just a world,
individual human beings are the only reality.
What kind of people we are
that’s the kind of India we have, isn’t it (Applause)?
So the focus
right from ancient times in this country was always about individual development.
We never
See this is why the western commentators are missing the entire point,
they don’t… they think India never had a civilization because
we never spoke about it.
We refused to speak about society, about nation,
we only spoke about individual development because
if you generate great individuals,
we will naturally have a great society.
A great society is a consequence,
it is not the cause.
The cause is great individuals.
So our focus was always on producing great human beings
never on producing a great society or a nation,
that happened as a consequence (Applause).
Speaker: So do you think from ancient times till now
do you think that things in India have changed?
So if they have
what brought us to the change we are in
and how do you see this development process of great individuals,
how do you see that being manifested in the modern times?
Speaker 2: And if I may add how can these ideas –
it’s something that I’m assuming that they are not so prevalent in
Sadhguru: I’m sorry? Not?
Speaker 2: I’m assuming that these ideas of individual development focused on an individual
are not so prevalent in today’s system
Sadhguru: No, we’ve gotten into mass production of everything (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes. So how we actually bring them back
and how should India then –
if I ask a larger question –
how should India as model of development?
Is it just aping the west
or can we bring back those elements of individual development?
Sadhguru: See, for anything to happen
you need a certain ecosystem,
certain economic, what to say,
a certain economic depth to… for people to be able to do it.
You must understand this,
the generation that we were growing up,
our parents were just crazy that
you must somehow get one degree and get into a government job.
Your parents are not doing that,
they are thinking little more easy,
they are trying to explore things,
they want you to do a startup,
they want you to do a business,
they want you to get into sport,
this was never there.
They were just saying get a job somehow
otherwise you’ll be on the street.
This was the level of economics of the time.
Today there is a little more economic space
where parents are looking at their children little differently,
still we are little compressed in the heads
but little more ease than what it was forty, fifty years ago.
Ask all your professors,
they were just pushed, pushed, get a job, get a job first thing.
Today your parents are not looking like that,
looking at what can you create,
what can I… our children can create,
what can they live,
how about their happiness –
nobody ever thought about our happiness, okay (Laughter).
So it needs a certain economic depth for any society
to experiment,
to have little more freedom to do things
otherwise putting them through the extruder
and getting them out in some form in which they’re useful,
this is what the society will do,
this is a natural consequence of
fifteen, twenty generations of extreme poverty.
This is
This mental structure and this economic structure
is a consequence of fifteen to twenty generations of extreme poverty.
Very bad poverty means
India has suffered poverty like nobody else.
People may show, you know, pictures of Africa and stuff,
you must know this,
in Africa there have been famines,
there have been wars,
unnecessary wars and tribal wars which have caused this in small scale,
in India the level of malnourishment and poverty
that’s happened in the last two centuries is most painful.
No other nation on the planet has suffered as much as this country,
no other country has lost as many people
as we have lost in the last century just for hunger and lack of nourishment.
Even today it is true
though we are much better,
even today unfortunately it is true
that we have the highest number of malnourished people in the country.
More than sixty percent of the rural population
even today,
they have not grown
their skeletal system has not grown to full size.
When they are in that state
you’re only thinking how to make a living,
you’re not thinking of how to open up human genius,
you’re not interested in all that.
You’re not thinking how to become self-realized,
you’re only thinking how to make a living.
So this has happened to us because we’ve been an occupied nation for too long.
We’ve been ripped off in every other way.
There’s no point blaming somebody,
we didn’t take care of it at that time,
it went out of our hands
but two-hundred-fifty, three-hundred years ago everybody wanted to come to India,
why?
Because it was the richest country on the planet.
We occupied a thirty-three percent space
in the economic space of the planet at one time.
Today probably we are two or three percent.
Hmm?
So because of this extreme poverty
we have a certain mindset
but I think in a generation or in next fifteen, twenty years
a whole lot of people will come out of this
because there’s little more ease,
little more space to play with,
little more space to push it.
So as a part of this
we are creating this space in many ways,
we have three types of education,
you know in Isha.
We have what’s called as Isha Vidya which is in rural India
which includes our own schools
which are mainly focused towards teaching English language, computer sciences,
regular academic education at a certain level,
bring discipline and well-being… health and well-being,
nourishment which is most important in the villages
and get them out of the village
because to get out of that economic and social pit in which they are
education is just a passport for them,
that’s one level of education.
Another level of education we have
what’s called as Isha Home School.
This is for the little more affluent people,
this happens inside the yoga center itself.
We have a huge track of land and various facilities.
These schools are run in a certain way,
twenty children live with two dedicated house parents
and everything,
the school itself is inside the house,
that’s why it’s called a home school.
Only for playground, laboratory and libraries they go out,
everything is inside the house.
This turns out expensive
an expensive way of delivering education
but this is done by dedicated people.
As a rule we never take any trained teachers.
We have doctors, engineers, accountants,
all kinds of people but no trained teachers because
we want education to happen as an inspiration
not as putting, you know,
shoving down information down somebody’s throat.
As an inspiration
children should get the spark of wanting to know something.
There is a whole range of activity of theatre,
art,
music,
sport,
all kinds of things.
Many of our… I mean
two, three of our boys are now in professional football in Germany.
So like this they are going into various things.
This school gives an enormous range of things.
And I made this now,
eleventh, twelfth I made it three years.
Not two years, three years I said one year extra
because by the time they got
get to eleventh a whole lot of parents will get marks mad.
We have invested so much time in music, theatre and many, many things,
now eleventh standard comes and everything is dropped
and they just start doing only… trying to get marks.
So I said three years,
if you want you stay otherwise no.
The surprising thing is nobody wants to withdraw their children.
This wouldn’t have happened twenty-five years ago,
everybody would have withdrawn their children.
Now nobody wants to be,
not even one child wants to be withdrawn,
everybody wants to go three years for two years.
Just as an experiment I announced this -
everybody is taking to it.
The idea is… See, Indians, wherever I go,
what I see is, they are in the best jobs,
they're earning well, they're highly qualified,
but they can't sing,
they can't dance,
they can't paint.
They can't do any damn thing except going to work.
Really, this' an unfortunate thing -
there's no life (Applause).
So, I thought we must invest enough in the children
before they get into professional colleges,
we have to invest enough in their art, music, sport,
variety of interests.
They must explore many things.
There's another school which we call as Isha Samskriti.
Here, if any child enters
compulsory they must stay with us, as a commitment, for twelve years.
Only with that commitment we take the children.
Here there's no academics,
they learn only yoga,
Kalaripayattu, which is the mother of all martial arts.
Have you seen Kalaripayattu, Kerala?
Questioner: _____ (Unclear)
Sadhguru: Yes.
Kalaripayattu,
classical dance,
classical music,
Samskrit language and English language.
This is all they learn.
You must see these children,
you won't believe.
They are a different set of human beings all together.
Here, the focus is just this -
developing human body and human brain to its fullest without a purpose.
I'm doing this because this is how I grew up.
I grew up without a purpose.
My father beat his head and say,
"What will this boy do?
He's not getting qualified for anything."
So I would say, "If I am not qualified for anything,
I can do just about everything" (Laughter)!
So (Laughs), these children are growing up in such a way,
most amazing.
You won't believe it unless you see it.
I'm… Just to tell you an experience.
From age of six to eighteen they are with us.
After that, if they wish, they can stay.
Otherwise, they can go out and do what they want to do.
There are many things that they can do which we are supporting them to do.
From fifteen to eighteen they become monks for three years
- extreme discipline and focus,
very serious practices.
So before I initiate
This, compulsory they have to come out at eighteen.
We… They cannot choose to be monks.
They have to come out at eighteen
because this
we have allowed… we have made them go into it as children.
When they become adults, they must come out of it.
There is… They cannot choose to continue.
So, first batch I wanted to initiate.
Now another is coming now in July, the third one.
The first batch, when I went to initiate about three years ago -
sixty days,
fifteen-year-old children,
they have been on sixty days of silence,
morning 3:30 to 8:30 in the evening,
they are in some kind of yogic sadhana.
Minimum of eight hours they're keeping their eyes closed and sitting, okay?
Just another four days are left for the initiation,
I want to see how these boys and girls are doing
- fourteen of them in the first batch.
I went there to see, morning 3:30.
I went and sat in the room.
These eight boys and six girls were sitting there -
I'll never forget this in my life -
they were just sitting there like that.
Believe me,
they were literally glowing.
I sat there and wept
because I've never seen children like this in my life.
I was not like this when I was fifteen, for sure.
They are beyond anything that you can think of
simply because they are focused
in developing the human mechanism to its fullest,
not about how to earn my living.
This' not the question.
When a earthworm,
with one-millionth of your brain can earn a living,
with such a big brain, earning a living,
is it such a big problem?
It is the most
It's the grossest way to approach life is -
how will I earn my living?
Everybody can earn their living.
The only problem comes in your life
when you want to live like somebody else,
that's a problem.
But earning a living is not a problem.
If you just make what is considered survival minimal,
don't go on exaggerating it,
then you will see you have a whole lot of time and opportunity
to create what you want in your life.
But people keep on raising the bar of survival
so much that they will not get to do anything in their life except surviving.
In the end, they don't know why they survived (Laughter/Applause).
Questioner: So I think there's a lot of curiosity in the audience also building up,
so unless you have some general comments to make,
we can open the floor to the audience.
Sadhguru: Tch, you're all engineers
Oh, they're disarming you (Laughter).
We must understand this -
engineering means,
essentially, to make things happen the way we want it.
That's engineering, isn't it?
To engineer this building means what?
We want it the way we want it.
We could have sat under a tree,
but we choose to build this building because
we want to sit under something
engineered the way we want it,
as suitable for us.
We air conditioned the place
because we want the temperature in a certain way.
All this we did,
but it is not important that you engineer this (Referring to oneself)
the way you want it? Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Outside is air conditioned,
inside is boiling -
what's the point?
Sadhguru: I'm saying power is being wasted on you (Few laugh).
In the last hundred, hundred-and-fifty years
with the advent of science and technology, we have more comforts and conveniences than any generation
ever could imagine, isn't it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: I'm looking for a higher opinion again (Laughter).
You have more comforts and conveniences
than any generation could ever imagine.
We are the most comfortable generation ever,
physically, materially.
But can you say are you the most peaceful generation?
Joyful?
Loving?
No.
Or can you even say you're the most intelligent generation?
That'll be a wrong thing to say.
Anybody who claims he is intelligent amounts to foolishness, isn't it?
Because the significance of intelligence is,
it shows you
how many loopholes are there in your intelligence.
Only a fool thinks there are no loopholes.
A truly intelligent person always sees
how many loopholes in my intelligence.
The significance of being in a technological institute
is not about just getting qualified to get some job somewhere
or a passport out of the country.
It should become a way of creating life,
making life happen better than the way it's happening right now
because this is the fundamental responsibility that we have
as a generation of people
because we occupy this space on the planet for a short… brief time.
When the last generation gave this planet to us,
whichever way they gave it,
it's our business that when we leave it,
we leave it little better than the way we had it -
very important.
How better?
In what way better?
You can decide that.
I won't say only ecologically better,
but in every way better.
It must be better than the way we got it.
This means we have to engineer ourselves
to fit in such a way
See, a well-engineered machine means
least amount of friction. Isn't it so?
Yes?
A well-engineered machine means what?
Least amount of friction.
Heavy friction means badly engineered, isn't it?
Isn't that the understanding?
So the fundamentals of yoga is this -
the fundamentals of yoga is
in the geometry of physical existence.
If you understand the geometry of what this human mechanism is,
the body is,
the psychological structure is,
the chemical processes are,
the energy structures are.
If you understand the geometry of this (Referring to oneself)
and become capable of observing the cosmic geometry,
if these two things are well-aligned,
suddenly your life hits off like a magic.
Your life is no more
a miserable drag,
but it's magical
simply because you have gotten the right geometry of things.
Anything that is geometrically perfect
will function absolutely smoothly
and for a very long time.
This is something that you must do to yourself
when you're young.
It doesn’t matter what you want to do in your life,
one thing must happen -
your body and your brain should not come in your way,
they must work for you.
Yes or no?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Never your body and your mind should not come
in the way of who you want to be.
Right now, for most people,
they themselves are a big issue.
When you are a issue,
how will you address the issues in the world?
If you really want to address the issues in the world,
this one (Referring to oneself) should never be a issue, isn't it?
"I am not the issue here. I am never the problem.
If there are problems, I will deal with it,
but I am never the problem" -
this must happen to you, isn't it?
Please make yourself like this,
that you are never the problem,
you're always a part of the solution,
never a part of the problem.
Right now (Applause)
Right now we have developed a certain attitude in the country,
a whole lot of people,
for every solution they invent a problem (Laughter).
For every solution they have found a problem.
So there are people who are working for problems,
there are people who are working for solutions.
Young people should stand up
and become a solution for future generations to come
and your own life to blossom.
Because the greatest fulfillment in one's life is
that you functioned in such a way
that you could do something which is much larger than yourself.
This must happen.
This is the highest fulfillment of activity -
that you are able to do something
which is larger than yourself.
Only then,
you will see fulfilment in activity.
Activity is one thing,
but most important thing is how you are.
People come to me right
Right now you're all saying you're IIT is the problem,
so I'm inviting you to IYC -
it's Isha Yoga Center (Laughter).
Lot of people come to me and say,
"Sadhguru…" These… These are people who have passed out,
okay? "Sadhguru, my mother-in-law (Laughter).
She's
She's another (Laughter), you know?
Form somewhere else she is (Laughter).
I just don't know how to live with this person.
And my husband, after all, her son (Laughter).
My wife, impossible.
My boss, he's not even human" (Laughter).
Like this it goes.
Then I tell them,
"See, don't worry -
your husband, wife, mother-in-law, boss,
nobody will come here,
you're protected, tch - like IIT.
IYC also well-protected.
Nobody will come here,
you just come and stay,
I'll give you a nice place to say (stay?),
food is good.
You don't have to do anything,
just be joyful, that's all.
None of these tormenters are there.
Just be joyful."
Twenty-four hours you leave them in the… one room.
You must see in how many ways they twist themselves out.
When you're alone, if you're miserable,
you're obviously in bad company, isn't it
(Laughter/Applause)
So, all the young people should do this to yourself.
At least for three days,
one week,
I will provide you the atmosphere.
Otherwise, you can walk into the Himalayas (Laughter),
but there, there is no food and supply, you know,
you will have to go searching.
I will provide you food, everything.
Just come, spend some time, not with any purpose,
simply.
If you sit along for three days -
no television, no book, no texting,
simply by yourself,
let's see what happens.
You must know the nature of who you are.
You should not go on dodging yourself
and one day you will explode into something.
You must know what is the level of madness you're suffering.
When I say madness -
if your mind is out of your control,
is that called madness
in definition?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If your mind does not take instructions from you,
it's out of control,
is that called madness?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Just try.
Just today, after this event,
just go sit quietly in your room -
just see
what all your mind does.
You… You decide,
don't tell anybody -
you decide what is the level of madness you're going through.
With this, if you enter the world, what will you create?
You will only create who you are, isn't it?
You cannot do anything other than what you are.
What you are is what will happen to the world around you.
Before you step out into the world,
is it not important, at least
you're this much equipped - that you are not the problem.
If you meet a problem and get married, we'll see
(Laughter),
but you are not the problem (Laughs).
Can you make this happen for yourself,
as young people -
that you are never the problem?
Hmm?
You are not the issue in your life.
Other issues, if they come, we will deal with it
to the best of our ability,
but this (Referring to oneself) should not be a issue, isn't it?
this can be easily done - very simple processes,
if you invest one twenty - thirty minutes a day,
you can bring this possibility into your life.
It is just that it needs a certain orientation
because life is continuously outward,
to turn inward it needs a certain help
and situation has to be created to make that happen.
We are very much willing to do that with you.
It's my wish and my blessing this must happen
to every youth of this country
because India,
the people of India has suffered immensely.
I don't know to what extent all of you were exposed,
many of you are from good families.
I have walked through rural societies
right from my, you know, early youth.
It's not good,
believe me.
It's just not good.
It's not some idyllic situation out there.
It is bad.
It's very bad.
In most parts of the world.
Where we are they say they are the better-off states.
The better-off states are like that.
I know the BIMARUs, how they are.
We can't just live like this.
We can't just continue to live like this -
insulating our humanity and thinking everything is okay.
It's time we
we have a living humanity.
That our heart beats for everything,
our heart bleeds for everything,
and we will do the best we can do.
In our lives, if we do not do what we cannot do, there's no problem.
But if we do not do what we can do,
we are a disastrous life, isn't it?
It's my wish and my blessing
you should not be that disaster (Applause).
Speaker: All right, so we'll now begin with the audience Q and A.
Anyone who has a question can raise his hand
and we have students here who'll get the mike to you,
Questioner: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Where are you?
Sadhguru: Okay.
Questioner: Sadhguru
Sadhguru: Little closer, if you can (Referring to microphone).
Questioner: So what _____ (Unclear) dissolve _____ (Unclear) to you
Sadhguru: All?
Questioner: _____ (Unclear)
Sadhguru: All suffering to me (Few laugh)?
Questioner: Dissolve into you.
Sadhguru: Ooh!
Questioner: I have read it in your book. So how can _____ (Unclear) dissolve ourselves into you?
Sadhguru: I am not sulfuric acid (Laughter/Applause).
Let's understand this -
what is dissolution?
I don't know how you got this.
That is not what has been said anywhere,
but… Little off, but let me correct that.
See, whether people are conscious of it
or not conscious of it,
every human being, knowingly or unknowingly,
are seeking solutions to wherever they are. Isn't it so?
Or in other words,
the nature of human intelligence is such
that wherever you are,
there is a problem (Laughs).
Yes?
This happened
You… It's okay if I tell you a joke, hmm?
I know it's a serious question,
very spiritual (Laughs).
A husband and wife who were over seventy years of age,
were celebrating their forty-fifth wedding anniversary,
tch.
So they decided
they will go through everything
just the way it happened on the wedding day.
So, wedding got over,
they went to the church where they got married,
they came out of it at the same time.
Then, as they did on that day,
they went to a romantic Italian movie.
Then after that,
they went for a dinner in a particular restaurant.
They had the same kind of food and the same kind of wine
and they started driving.
Then the wife said,
"John, what's happened with you?
Do you remember forty-five years ago
when we were driving,
how passionately you kissed me."
So he said, "Okay" (Laughter).
Hey, don’t laugh,
you don't know what is forty-five years later (Laughter).
That's a different world, okay (Laughs)?
So, he tried to kiss her
and unfortunately forty-five years later
your body is not the same
and the cars are faster,
and boom they went into the bridge.
So, they were at the gates of heaven (Few laugh).
Then they got checked in together (Laughter).
And because both of them were golfers,
they asked,
"Is there a golf course in heaven?"
Saint Peter said,
"Yes, the best! The best golf course you would have ever seen."
"So, can we see?"
He said "Fine."
They saw it was an immaculate course.
They asked,
"Can we tee off?
Is there a tee time?"
Anytime is tee time in heaven,
day or night.
So
"But we don't have our clubs."
"No problem. Just for you, fitted for you,
golden clubs."
So, the man teed off, splitting the fairway,
straight and long.
Tch,
the lady walked up to the lady… lady's tee and teed off,
again, straight.
Then they were walking towards the ball for the second shot,
suddenly the husband became depressed,
as it usually, many times happens to the husbands (Laughter).
She looked at him and said,
"John, what's the problem?
We are in heaven,
we are on the best golf course,
you had a great shot,
I had a great shot,
why are you so depressed?"
He said,
"If it was not for your stupid health food,
we could have come here long time ago" (Laughter/Applause).
So, this is the nature of human intellect -
because it gets only one face of everything,
it is always thinking some
everything is a problem.
When you don't have a problem,
you're dissolved,
please see this.
Because you are not a problem, you're a possibility (Applause).
When people
Most people
Most people, when they utter the word human,
they say, "Oh, I am only a human."
They're always referring to the word human
as a limitation,
as a problem.
Very few people are saying, "I am human,"
referring to the immensity of being human
because most people have not explored
the immensity of what it means to be human.
This is why there is so much talk about
heaven and god and so many things -
because people have failed to explore
the immensity of what it means to be human.
If you explore the full depth and dimension
of what it means to be human,
then you don't worry about dissolution
because is it true
is it true that you were not born this way,
of this size, as you are today?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Slowly you accumulated.
How?
Just the food that you've eaten, isn't it?
What you accumulate can be yours,
you cannot say it's me, isn't it?
Hello?
As I'm speaking,
I pick up this vessel and say,
"This is my vessel."
Then you will think,
"Oh, Sadhguru has some problem (Laughter),
but everybody says he's wise, let us listen some more."
After some time I say,
"This is me," then you will say,
"Let's go" (Laughter)
because now it's dangerous, isn't it (Laughter)?
But this you're doing every day -
food appears on your plate,
you say, "This is my food."
You eat it and then you say, "This is me."
You
If you get this point today,
that the body that you carry is just a piece of the planet
- today if you get it experientially,
your life will chance today.
Otherwise, one day you will anyway get it from the maggots,
but it's a bit late, you know?
So dissolution does not mean destruction.
Dissolution means you broke the boundaries of your individuality
because your individual existence is a myth that you have created.
You are very much individual,
you don't like the person who is sitting next to you right now,
so don't breathe the air that they are breathing.
Do one thing,
just close your nose like this (Gestures),
hold it like this (Gestures) for two minutes,
you know that without communication you won't last for a moment.
This is not just with respiration,
this is with every particle in this body.
Without being in communication with the entire existence,
this (Referring to oneself) cannot exist for a moment.
So dissolution is not something that you have to do.
If you drop the conclusions that you have made about yourself,
this is already dissolved.
Modern physics is telling you this, isn't it?
You already dissolved,
you don't have to dissolve.
It is just that you have a fancy idea in your head.
To get that idea out is the spiritual process.
Spiritual process is not a real process.
Spiritual process is just helping you
to distance yourself
from your physiological and psychological process
so that you see life just the way it is (Applause).
Questioner: Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Where are you?
Questioner: Here (Laughs).
Sadhguru: Okay.
Questioner: So, I completely resonate with the idea of yours
which you have in education
and having graduated from this place,
and I don't know why I did engineering,
one year of preparation,
four years of B. Tech,
two years of M. Tech.
Out of that frustration of why I'm doing engineering,
I wanted to work in the education sector,
and currently I am working,
I feel
I face many challenges.
To bring about a change in the system of how things are working
and how children are taught,
it takes very
It is a very slow process of how things move
and how much you try that,
okay, there should be a holistic development and this and that.
Things boil down to, okay,
fall at feet and do this and do that
Though, I want to ask you, if you
if you can give some tips on how your
how you think of how education should be -
can be actually scaled up.
there are so many models
which are there in some parts of the country
which believe in this,
and I too feel, kee (Referring to Hindi word – that),
mediation can be introduced in the system of education.
So, what do you feel kee (Referring to Hindi word – that),
how can we make this happen at a large level?
Sadhguru: Please (Gestures?).
See, we are always thinking of changing the system.
I am not saying it should not, it should,
but within the existing systems we can do many things.
Depending upon the individual teachers and individual educators,
how they operate.
Because when you try to change the system in your own time,
when you want to change the system,
you must understand
any system,
even within the family if you want to change a system,
it will take many years.
It's not going to change overnight.
Sometimes a generation has to pass as
for it to change.
To walk into a house with your shoes on,
one generation has to pass (Laughs), isn't it?
So,
instead of thinking how to change the system -
yes,
we must have the vision of changing the system,
but within the system,
how to do the maximum delivery
is something that all of us should always look at.
Otherwise, we are always talking about future generations
without addressing the current generations.
It'll never work that way,
it'll only be a dream.
We have to make the difference in the current generation.
Only then, if you take a small step now,
the next generation will take a bigger step.
But without taking this step,
we are dreaming of a big step,
it will not happen,
it will be just an idea which will not work.
So, as an educator -
you mentioned the word meditation.
We must understand this, what meditation means.
The word meditation,
the English word meditation doesn't mean anything.
If somebody sits with their eyes closed,
people think they are meditating,
but you can sit with your eyes closed for many reasons.
Unable to bear the world,
you can close your eyes (Laughs).
Yes.
You may be
In yoga there is many things -
you may be doing
japa, tapa, dharana, dhyana, samadhi, shoonya, samyama -
we don't know what you're doing.
So there is
The word meditation is not specific.
It is too general
and it's not saying anything in particular.
Let us say if we are thinking to align the word meditation
with what we refer to as dhyan,
or dhyana,
or dhayanam as you go south (Laughs)
Because Hindi speaking people,
you have a way of clipping away the words in the end.
Hmm?
We say Rama, you say Ram.
we say dhyanam you said dhyan. Tch,
you're cutting off everything in the end,
that's your option,
but if you're thinking it is dhyan, or dhyana, or whatever,
what this means is,
if you sit here
if you sit here,
if you clear
if you have a distinct experience
that your body is here (Gestures),
you mind is somewhere else,
what is you is elsewhere.
Or in other words, there is a little space
between what is you and what is your body,
what is you and what is the content of your mind.
Suppose this little space was achieved within you right now,
would all these young boys be complaining about stress?
You must do one thing -
if you were an aviator you would know this -
you're driving to the airport,
traffic jam, traffic jam, traffic jam,
ouhh, you curse everybody
and honk and do all this and get there,
then you fly.
Then you're flying over the traffic jam,
it all looks very nice, you know (Laughter)?
Simply because of the distance (Laughs)!
When you were in it,
it was a terrible thing.
Once you're flying above it, it looks quite nice actually,
traffic jams (Laughs).
Once there is a little distance,
that's the end of suffering.
So if they
if you create a little space between you and your body,
between you and your mind,
this is the end of suffering
because there are only two kinds of sufferings in your life -
physical suffering, mental suffering.
Do you know any other kind of suffering?
Hmm?
Only two sufferings.
If you distance yourself a little bit, that's all.
Distancing is not by attitude,
anyway these are accumulations.
You gathered this body,
you gathered this mind.
If you keep what belongs to you one way,
and what is you in another way,
it's taken care of.
So, we can teach you a simple method
with which you can do this -
very, very simple process.
Every human being is capable of this.
Let's understand this -
when it comes to external realities,
all of us are differently capable,
no two human beings are equally capable.
When it comes to inner possibilities,
all of us are equally capable.
No human being has come better endowed than the other.
It is just that
most human beings never look in that direction (Applause).
Questioner: Namaste Sadhguru. Mein... I’m here.
My name is Kamal.
I’m here with my wife, my mother
and thank you so much for coming here,
we have been following your guidance for many years now
and it inspired us to...
You mentioned about IYC,
it inspired us to create YIC or Young India Challenge
where two days back we invited the youth of India from Erode,
Bangalore, Assam to solve India’s challenges
and I would like to ask you is that
the way we’re connecting this is that
if people find their passion and do what they love,
they should be able to positively contribute to the society
and solve the biggest challenge.
But we see that there are so many practical situations
that young people face
and today we’re talking about youth and truth,
how can we do this more
and wake up more and more young people
that not only they follow their passion
but they must connect it to nation building
and solving the biggest challenges of our time,
especially the youth here which is as you said, privileged
and has house, shelter and the basics are covered.
How can we make it more experiential,
that it becomes a movement
that young people not only do what they love
but also make a positive impact.
How can we do this more and get a large number of young people
to get into this conversation?
Sadhguru: You are the young man?
I’m willing to speak to any young people or old people.
I...
I don't see youth as a numerical entity.
I think lot of young people are pretty old -
complaining about stress (Laughter).
Being young or old is not just of age,
not the question of your birthday,
when you were born.
Have you...
Are you an exuberant life
or have you become (Gestures)?
Youth means life in the making,
all possibilities wide open,
that’s what youth means.
You’ve not become conceited yet.
You should not be, I’m saying (Laughs).
You’ve not made your conclusions about life,
you’re still willing to look at everything fresh.
That’s what youth means.
I think it’s the business of every human being to stay that way all their life
that you never make your conclusions,
you become a constant exploration
and a seeking in life,
that you’ve not become a conclusion.
Conclusion should happen with death.
Before that if you conclude,
then we will have to endure dead people walking around in the society
who have no zest for anything but we have to bear with them (Laughs).
That should not happen to you or to anybody, isn’t it?
So, you said many things in one question,
about nation building,
about many things.
Yes,
in seventy years we should have built the nation
but we have made some grave mistakes
for which we are paying the price
but there’s no point doing postmortem
and going on thinking what we could have done right at that time.
We should do the right things now
and as a...
as a nation,
as a culture,
I must tell you this,
I speak to variety of people,
to the highest level of academics,
scientists,
various parts of the world,
but I still find,
if you take a bunch of people,
just like that if you catch them,
one hundred people on the street in Mumbai or Bangalore or Chennai,
they’re much smarter than anybody you can find anywhere.
Really.
No, I...
I didn’t mean to leave out Delhi (Laughter).
I’m saying average intelligence in this country,
average intellect in this country is naturally high
because of a certain cultural ethos
that we’ve had for a long time.
But our problem is,
there human intelligence is organized to produce something,
here human intelligence is disorganized.
Everybody is a genius but nothing happens.
You go and sit in a tea shop,
he will be telling you how Virat Kohli,
you know his bat is...
he’s not holding it right,
tch what he should do.
The tea shop owner.
He will also say how Narendra Modi does not know this, this, this
how he should have done this,
how he should have done that.
Only problem is, he does not know how to make good tea
(Laughter/Applause).
We must transit from this.
We must be a conscious application of genius,
not a wild application of genius.
It will not produce any results,
it will only create problems.
It’s very important that we organize India
to a productive future
otherwise we’ll work against each other constantly.
See, we’re driving against each other.
All of us could easily drive.
With the roads that we have,
for the traffic that we have, we could easily drive well.
We could easily come... come up with something –
okay, everybody must drive minimum sixty kilometers per hours.
Because there are some very fast drivers,
some slow drivers,
some who don’t know what is driving,
some who thinks they are Formula 1 racers,
all kinds of people are there on the same street.
You know, this I realized about twenty years ago or more here.
About twenty years ago, when I first went to United States,
I’m always used to putting my right foot down,
full on.
So I’m hitting like hundred-and-fifty miles per hour.
People say,
“Sadhguru don’t do this, they will handcuff you!”
I said,
“Why? The road is wide open,
the engine is good, what’s my problem?
And I’m okay.”
They said,
“No, Sadhguru, that’s not the thing,
see here they put seventy.
You have to go seventy only.”
It took me some time to understand.
Then I looked around, then I see a eighty-two-year-old woman is driving a school bus.
Then I saw,
“Okay, I can drive at any speed and keep the car on the road,
but now this lady who’s eighty-two is driving a school bus,
maybe if I go bhooom like this next to her,
we don’t what happens to her.
Then it took me a year to take this passion of putting my right foot down,
now I’m little controlled
and just above the speed limit I am (Laughs).
Because I started appreciating the organization.
It kind of...
For an Indian mind it’s a little difficult
because what I can do,
I can do
but what about the rest of the organization?
The organization has been done so that everybody can participate in it.
I may be good at something so I will do it in a certain way.
If I want to do that, I must go on a racetrack, you know?
I really want to hit two-hundred miles per hour,
I must go on a racetrack, not on the road,
because the road is made for everybody.
All kinds of people are driving
and most people don’t have help
even though they’re eighty-five, ninety.
There are ninety-year-olds driving.
You can't drive at hundred miles per hour next to him.
But we can easily set this up.
I’m just taking road as an example,
with every aspect of our life,
I think India what it lacks is
too much genius and not enough organization.
You young people must bring that organization into this country
so that this intellectual investment
or intellectual you know, the bank that we have,
the human resource that we have can become a great potential,
not a huge problem.
It can become a big problem if it is not organized (Applause).
Speaker: So we’re running a little short of time,
it’s gonna be the last question we’ll be taking.
Please, microphone, take the microphone.
Questioner: No, I don’t need one. _____ (Inaudible)
there is so much effort and struggle to change
and design human mind when we are on the _____ (Unclear).
Is there any way to design that _____ (Inaudible)?
Sadhguru: You must use the microphone (Laughs).
Microphone is not your requirement,
it’s my requirement (Laughter).
Questioner: Thank you, Madam.
I said there is so much effort and struggle
to design and shape human mind
when we are out of womb.
Is there any way you know sir
to design human mind when we are inside womb,
that’s my question.
Sadhguru: At home, is that what you are asking?
Questioner: Inside womb.
Sadhguru: Oh, whoa, whoa, whoa (Laughter).
Who is pregnant (Laughter/Applause)?
Now if you do not know this,
maybe in Northern part of the country
it’s largely almost gone totally,
in South it’s still little alive in the villages
but they’re also it’s wiped out quite a bit.
If you do not know this
from preconception to conception
to various stages of pregnancy and delivery
and as long as the mother is feeding the child
there’s an entire established process in this country
as to how a woman should eat,
what she should do,
whose kind
what kind of people she should interact with,
what kind of form she should look at,
what kind of form she should not look at,
what kind of sounds she should hear,
what kind of sound she should not hear,
all this was very much there.
But we must also understand life has changed.
Today women are going to work,
they have to get into that horrible bus
where they’re pushed around
it doesn’t matter she is pregnant
and all kinds of things -
all kinds of fumes,
all kinds of sounds,
all kinds of noises,
all kinds of abuse,
every kind of thing happening to her.
In some way we are doing that to the child also.
There is no job in the country
or in the world where
you can take off for one-and-a-half years and get back to the job
to fulfill this.
In one way because of various things –
this is,
I’m not passing a judgment on this
but for various reasons
we are not taking
the business of manufacturing the next generation of people
with sufficient care.
Tch, we are not paying enough attention to it
for which we’ll pay a price.
Over a period of time we will pay an immense price for that.
But we are definitely not taking enough care about it
in the entire world not just in this country
because we’ve got all kinds of social situations
which does not allow that space for a woman to dedicate that kind of time and attention.
See, being pregnant is not just about reproduction,
we literally manufacturing the next generation of people, isn’t it?
Is it not important of all the products that you produce on this planet,
is it not most important that we produce wonderful human beings
for the future generation?
Is it not the most important thing (Applause)?
But we have created a social situation and an economic situation
where there is no such possibility
to take care of these things.
To whatever extent
individual woman
or individual families can take care of it
they can take care of it
but for the larger society it’s out of question
because things have changed,
you can’t turn it back just like that.
Questioner: Sir, one question
Sadhguru: Hey, still the child is not born yet (Laughter)?
The
The intelligence of the body is such
if you already do not know this,
if a woman delivers a male child,
the quality of the milk that she produces is in a certain way.
If she delivers a female child
the quality of the milk is totally different.
If she delivers twin, if she delivers twins,
one male and one female,
one breast will ooze certain type of milk,
another breast will ooze another kind of milk.
This is the level of intelligence invested in this body,
we have to treat it with that much care.
This is not some crude machinery,
this is the finest piece of technology on the planet, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
This is the finest thing.
In the entire evolutionary scale,
these millions of years of work that nature did
to produce this
but in our desperation for economic well-being
I think we are not paying the kind of attention that this needs,
the kind of care that this needs
so that this can function at the highest level
and can also produce human beings for the future who are of a certain kind.
So how to develop the brain when they’re in the womb?
It’s very important that
the atmosphere in which the child is growing up in a certain way
with the least amount of disturbance,
with right kind of reverberations,
right kind of sounds,
right kind of food, everything.
Today they’re barely nourished the pregnant woman
in most part of the country. They’re barely nourished,
where is the question of right kind of vibrations,
right kind of atmospheres.
One thing we can do for this is,
every home,
if possible every working place,
we can have a consecrated space.
Today slowly they are coming up with instruments
which can measure the reverberations of certain objects.
We can create consecrated spaces
or we can create consecrated objects
which at least at that time she can carry upon her body so that,
kind of to some extent –
it’s not the best solution –
to some extent it neutralizes the outside impact
to whatever extent possible.
Or if she lives in a home
the place where she sleeps and other things are taken care of,
some amount of respite can be there for there
for that new life which is blossoming within the womb.
Please (Applause).
Questioner: Sir, by reading ancient scriptures
like Bhagwat Gita or Guru Grand Saheb
we tend to become very much pure,
we look the world from a different perspective.
Sadhguru: What? What is that?
You become pure?
Questioner: A person becomes pure.
Sadhguru: But why were they impure (Laughter)?
No,
why were they impure?
Questioner: Because sometimes people are very much unkind.
Sadhguru: Un?
Questioner: Unkind.
Sadhguru: Unkind, oh.
Questioner: So we look at the world in a different way,
we become very much kind
and we develop the tendency of forgiving people
but what happens when we go to the work place
we realize that
because of your this attitude,
because you become very much kind
and you have the tendency to forgive people
the other people they start using you.
So what should we do?
What a person should do in such cases?
Should a person stop reading such ancient scriptures like Bhagwat Gita, Guru Grant Saheb
or what is the right age to read such books (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: Now, one thing, the last part of the question that you said,
other people will start using you,
that means you’re not using yourself well,
that there is space and time that others can use you.
If you’re using yourself to the fullest extent
nobody will have an opportunity to use you (Applause).
See,
if your
Let us say you’re using something
twenty-four hours of the day,
where will I get the time to use the same thing?
So twenty-four hours of the day
every moment of your life
if you are using this (Referring to oneself) to the fullest extent
to do whatever you want to do
where is the chance for somebody to use this?
If you’re not using this,
it’s good somebody else is using it (Applause).
Now
Anyway Bhagwat Gita is not about kindness,
Krishna is talking about war (Laughter).
He’s a very practical person,
where there is war needed,
he is trying to instigate war.
He sees there is no other solution
so he is saying let’s go to war.
Somebody else is hesitating,
he says, this is it,
this is the time to fight,
this is not the time to hesitate.
Where is kindness in this?
Very simple political sense,
what needs to be done is being done.
He is only saying don’t get caught up in this activity,
you need to do it, just do it.
Don’t make too much fuss about it.
Kindness, tch
See,
kindness means
Kindness is useful only for the fallen, isn’t it?
When you’re standing on your feet
do you want somebody to be kind to you?
Hello?
Let us say you were going to your friend’s house every day,
they welcomed you and everything,
they fed you
and took care of you
but one day you realized
they were doing it simply because they were kind to you.
Tch, will you feel insulted or no?
Yes or no?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Only when you’re fallen kindness matters.
When you’re standing on your feet
you don’t want kindness,
you want acceptance,
you want respect, you want
Yes or no?
So kindness is only for the sick and the dying
not for young.
You should not ask for kindness ever.
Do you want to pass because your professor is kind to you
(Laughter)
Do you
Do you want to get a job because somebody is kind to you
or because out of your competence you want to get the job,
which way is it?
Do not seek anything in this life out of kindness,
that will happen when you’re in your death bed,
when you can’t do anything for yourself,
then you expect some kindness,
that also
if you’re very capable
you can handle that also.
You can walk to your grave and die,
I can teach you that technology also (Laughter).
Yes.
That as you live consciously
you can also die consciously,
it is possible for a human being to do this.
A whole lot of creatures do this, do you know?
Do you know
when a cobra wants to die
it… it finds a place somewhere
usually on top of a tree,
one branch where nobody can reach
and just sits there for over twelve for fifteen days
without eating and it’ll die there.
When I first noticed this I didn’t figure this,
I thought why is this cobra become so skinny?
I brought it home
and I pour milk into his mouth
and I tried to make him eat
and then I leave him,
he again goes up the tree and sits there.
Three, four times I bring him down,
again he goes up there and sits there
and after five days he’s dead.
So when a crawly creature like a snake
has this much awareness
that life is coming to an end and he wants to die in a certain way,
human beings must have this, isn’t it?
In this culture we developed this,
when a human being knows his life is ebbing,
he withdraws,
he sits by himself,
it’s called Vanaprastha.
He goes into the jungle, sits by himself,
slowly leaves his life
this body.
This is a wonderful way of conducting life.
Now till the last moment somebody is pumping it
because it’s an industry (Laughter).
It doesn’t matter they want to stretch you for another few hours
because few hours will cost a few thousand rupees
and whatever else, that’s different.
So, don’t
as a young person don’t ever look for kindness,
let your competence open the doors
not somebody’s kindness, isn’t it (Applause)?
Anybody.
Please, take the microphone
take the microphone.
Where are you?
you don’t have the microphone.
[Sadhguru] This week we have seen the end of an era, in the form of Nelson Mandela's death.
The significance of his life is not just political
of course, politically it's of great significance to that nation,
but as a man, we have seen very few men like that in the last century.
And as many of you who do not know the history of this nation's freedom struggle,
even India's freedom struggle was incubated in South Africa.
It is a certain affront to Mahatma Gandhi's dignity, which the apartheid regime delivered,
which ignited India's spiritual (freedom) movement in a big way.
It's unfortunate that injustice, subjugation
and many levels of cruelty generates wonderful men.
We have to find a way - which is (what is) our effort
to generate such men when there is no strife, when there is no subjugation, when there is no injustice.
We should incubate such men in joy, in celebration --
but largely, societies have failed to do that.
Because it's pain that becomes the most profound experience of most human life.
Not joy, not love, not ecstasy, it's the pain.
It is the profound of the.. profoundness of that experience
which spawns men of rare qualities of incredible strength and balance.
Having gone through unspeakable levels of cruelty and injustice,
in spite of that, not becoming bitter and hateful
this is the hallmark of Mandela
that he still lived laughing, joyful, not resentful.
That takes a certain quality for a man to do that.
Small things that you.. that happen to people -- they remember forever
and they are resentful for their whole life for little things.
Not imparted by some cruel regime, small things that parents did to children, they remember [laughs]
and are resentful to the end of their life.
The end of his life must be a reminder for every one of us
that you shouldn't stand in a line of resentful people.
You should stand alone in true freedom.
Freedom doesn't come because of political processes or economic processes.
Freedom comes when nobody can incite an unnecessary quality in you, no matter what they do.
His eventful life has come to an end.
its for us to see that many more men like that are spawned on the planet
not necessarily in the kind of situations that he was molded.
A spiritual process means just that -- that the outside situations need not drive you;
outside situations do not mold you.
You don't have to be whipped by the world to be at your best
you're willing to whip yourself to be at your best.
When it's self-driven, we call it spiritual, when it is driven by somebody, it becomes slavery.
K V Kamath: I want to
maybe stay on Davos for one more round
before you move on.
You have seen Davos from 2006
till after the crash of 2008,
and just before we came here we were having a short chat,
you said you addressed depression (Sadhguru Laughs) in the post-2008 period
and of course you have seen the euphoria of the preceding years.
Euphoria to depression,
how do… how do… how do these mood swings happen
and how does one balance out one’s views as it were?
Sadhguru: I… I think one reason is,
lot of people have not strived for their success,
they are successful by chance,
that’s why they are euphoric and depressed.
If they had crafted their success you would know the mechanics of success,
it doesn’t matter what’s happening today,
you know where you’re going anyway.
Nobody can take that away from you,
so people who do not know the mechanics of what they are doing,
the fundamentals of what they are doing,
by chance because of situational help somebody becomes successful,
he is euphoric.
He thinks he’s hit
They are hitting a lottery, they are not successful. (Laughs)
Hitting a lottery is not success, it’s just chance.
So because of that you see too much of these swings
and (Laughs) anyway as I was telling you,
they asked me to handle this session called ‘Recession and Depression.’ (Laughs)
It was 2008, just then recession had moved into the European and American market,
all these billionaires were carrying long faces.
So I am supposed to spread it a little bit. (Laughter)
K V Kamath: Spread a smile like this.
Sadhguru: So I said, ‘Recession is bad enough,
do you need depression on top of it?’
You always dreamed you want to walk the beach,
you want to swim,
you want to play golf.
Okay, this is the time, less work.
This is not the end of the world and above all
the way we have structured our economic process in the planet is such
that if we fail we will be depressed,
if we succeed we will be damned.
I said I prefer that you are depressed. (Laughter)
We… Because our economy is all about ‘more’, not about ‘all’.
I think the business leaders,
people who have reached a certain level of success
should shift their attention from ‘more’ to ‘all’.
‘All’ would naturally be … inclusiveness.
‘More’ is taking,
‘all’ is an embrace.
K V Kamath: Moving on to something that we see across India today,
the mood of negativity.
In a way it is a continuum of this depression that we are looking at.
But this collective mood of negativity,
how would you look at it
and how would you actually explain this?
Sadhguru: I think you meet only the people in the boardrooms. (Laughter)
Right now, a lot of people, too many people,
including the business leaders and the media, everybody is
constantly talking about India will become a superpower
which makes me very apprehensive.
You don’t have legs and you want to climb Mount Everest,
it sounds really apprehensive to me
because we are going to flounder with this kind of attitude.
Everybody is talking about India becoming superpower.
You need to understand this,
in this country right now,
for 1.2 billion people
you neither have the roads nor the airports nor the infrastructure
nor the homes nor even enough trees,
or not enough rivers,
not even a piece of sky for 1.2 billion people.
The only thing that we have is we have a population,
we’ve done well on that. (Laughter)
We have a huge population.
If you transform this population into a very competent,
focused, inspired population,
yes, we could be a super power in a different way.
Then you understand ‘superpower’ in normal sense.
Superpower means people have always thought military might and something else,
but we will be a super power because just about anywhere you go,
already we see that,
but in a much bigger way, every company on the planet could be led by an Indian.
That is superpower (Applause); we are all over the place.
So somebody was telling,
‘See, this is Bharat; Mahabharat is elsewhere else.’ (Laughter)
You know, it’s in a different place.
So I know there’s one segment of people who are constantly morose
about markets going down, markets going up and stuff.
There is another level of people who are too
too loose in their thought that they think we are going to become a superpower.
We don’t have the fundamentals.
I don’t have to tell this to you, you know better.
We don’t have the fundamentals to become any kind of superpower;
it’s just too much of nonsense.
Our problem is we are too dramatic in our minds,
we exaggerate our success, we exaggerate our failures,
but it doesn’t matter the crowd sees it that way, it’s all right.
But people in positions of responsibility and leadership
should be able to see what is the reality,
not imagining things about being superpower,
not imagining things about going into dumps -
both are not true.
We are at a threshold;
we are sitting with a possibility,
a huge possibility in front of us,
but between possibility and reality there is a distance.
Do we have the necessary commitment,
strength and focus to walk the distance,
that’s a big question.
Is every one of us working towards creating an India
which will have the necessary focus and commitment to walk the distance
from possibility to reality
this is still a question mark;
which way we will go, we don’t know. (Laughs)
Sadhguru: So
can your restlessness be taken away and brought to restfulness?
Or simply the question is just this.
You’re giving it too many names.
Don’t give it too many names for your problems.
Your problem is just this
your body and your mind are not taking instructions from you, that's all.
Don’t give it too many names.
You give it too many names because you like to decorate your problems.
If you decorate your problem you may not want to get rid of it.
Yes?
If you decorate your problem too much,
you may not want to get rid of it.
This is very simple;
your body is not taking instructions from you so
your mind is not taking instructions from you so
if these two things were taking instructions from you
if you want action, intense action,
do not want action, absolute stillness.
Both would be possible, isn't it?
Hmm?
So the essential problem is they are not taking instructions from you.
Why are they not taking instructions from you?
Because you are like a super computer without a keyboard.
Do you understand? (Laughs)
This is a super computer without a keyboard.
You know if your head doesn’t work, people do this (Gestures),
it doesn’t work that way.
This is not where the switch is.
Have you seen people scratching their head when it doesn’t work?
It's not going to work like that.
So if you only had a keyboard you type out what you want.
Now because you don't know where it is,
you’re punching it all over,
all kinds of things are coming out.
Once in a way, things that you want happen,
most of the time things that you don’t want happen.
So the find… the thing is to find access to the keyboard.
How to operate this machine? Which is what we are trying to do.
So just pay attention,
we will give you a keyboard.
Then you type out whatever you want.
I don’t want to decide what you should type.
You type out whatever the hell you want, but what you want should happen.
Yes?
If your body and your mind does not do what you want,
what is the point having them, losing them is better.
No wonder people are talking about no mind.
It's not far before when
when it becomes very torturous they will say,
‘To be or not to be.’
What they’re saying is ‘No body’
yes?
When somebody says, ‘To be or not to be.’
What they’re thinking of is a no body state, isn't it?
No body, no mind state will anyway come, okay (Laughs),
don’t… don’t ask for it. It will come anyway;
unasked it will come and knock on your door one day.
Till then the thing is to use these two wonderful things that you have
and see what you can do with this.
So it is just that
for one person the keyboard may be touch mechanism
or for one person it's like this just a verbal instruction your phone works,
hmm?
You have a phone like that?
With verbal instruction it works.
There is one… if you just lightly touch like this (Gestures) it’ll work.
There’s another one if you do this, this (Gestures) it’ll work.
There are some… (Gestures) (Laughter)
you have to do that.
Have you seen like 1970s
some espionage movie or a James Bond movie,
they have a phone which is this (Gestures) big.
Have you seen?
Have you seen these things? (Laughs)
This big phone, bigger the phone the longer it is going, that’s what they meant to say in those movies –
big phone like this; (Gestures)
now only this much phones (Gestures)
hands free you can speak because technologies have improved.
Accordingly in each person it may be different kind
one may just change by instruction,
another needs light punching,
another needs little more,
another needs (Tapping his hands)
different kind of people.
So whether you need just two days yoga or two weeks yoga,
two months yoga, two years yoga,
we can decide that after two days are over. (Laughs)
If two days are enough, fine, that’s wonderful.
If you need more we must do more but is it very, very important
your body and your mind takes instructions from you, you and you alone and nobody but you.
Yes or no?
Very important, isn't it?
We must do that.

(Questioner): A very dear friend of mine is
completely consumed with cancer.
She is very very very ill.
Is there anything that I can do or
she can do to come through this?
(Sadhguru):Come through means, get cured?
(Questioner): Yes,
(Sadhguru): Or die peacefully?
(Questioner): Get better. Get better.
(Sadhguru): Hum?
(Questioner): Get better, get well.
(Sadhguru): Now, I'm not talking with any disregard to your friend
but I want you to understand people need to die.
When and how is the only question,
isn't it?
So, if death comes to us, yes we will do everything possible to save ourselves
but if it goes beyond that let us learn to die gracefully.
Let's not fight with it and fight with it
like endlessly, you know,
it's a horrible way to die.
The way people are dying in western countries is really a horrible way to die.
Even though they're 85-90, staying in a hospital with full of pipes and needles all over them
this is not. It's okay if you die two years early, what's the problem?
You die peacefully and gracefully, that's more important, isn't it?
See, death is the last thing that you do in your life, shouldn't you do it gracefully?
We must learn to accept death as a part of our life.
We are not wishing death
but when it comes let us learn to go through it gracefully, you know.
If there is a possibility of saving ourselves, living beyond that, that is fine
but what I see in all the geriatrics homes in United States,
many people are living beyond their death
just because of medical support
and it's such a torture to themselves and to everybody.
You should see the way in some of the homes they're being treated,
not because of anything. the people who work there,
after sometime they get irritated because these dead bodies walking around,
they don't understand anything, they've forgotten everything,
they are like lost all their senses because they have lived beyond their time.
If there was no too much medical input they would have gracefully died
at a certain point, isn't it?
There is no sense in stretching it one more month,
one more month, one more month; it doesn't make any sense.
But life is not understood that way,
we are thinking of always stretching it.
So, if somebody's body is broken beyond redemption
let's learn to die gracefully.
Let us make the person understand it's okay, it's alright, you know,
we're all in the cue, aren't we?
So, you're ahead of me, isn't that great? (Laughter)
In any cue you want to be ahead of everybody, isn't it? (Laughs)
So, I'm not trying to make fun of somebody's illness
but we should understand where one thing stops and the other thing begins, isn't it?

In the last few centuries
India as a nation
and Indians as people have lived far below the potential
for variety of reasons.
Though it’s been sixty eight years,
nourishment,
health,
education is yet to be addressed for nearly half the population.
In the last one year
there is a new sense of hope and expectations in the Indian people
and also in the world beyond.
There is an opportunity to power ourselves into well-being
because we have the synergy of youth.
We as a nation neither have
enough land nor water nor mountain nor forest nor even a piece of sky
for 1.25 billion people.
The only thing we have is people.
If we leave this population
uneducated, unfocused, unskilled and uninspired,
we have a disaster in the waiting
but if the same population
if we can transform this in this generation
into a focused, capable, skilled and inspired population,
we have a miracle in the waiting,
in the sense, for the first time nearly half a billion people,
we can move them from one level of living
to a completely another level of living which is historic;
never before had it happened anywhere through the democratic process.
India has the opportunity to become a powerful nation on the planet.
When I say powerful,
it’s not about a powerful army.
It is just that we have the power to guide the rest of the world.
We have the knowledge and the capability to guide the world towards well-being.
The rest of the world will naturally look towards India
because always right through ancient time’s
wisdom means the world looked east towards India.
We should not lose this position
and for us to gain this position
becoming a powerful nation
by empowering people is a must and the possibility is right here;
we are sitting on the threshold.
Through this message I request
every Indian citizen
whether you are in the country or
you are Indian origin and you are elsewhere;
this great possibility –
realizing this great possibility is not going to happen just because of the leadership.
It is important that every Indian citizen stands up to make this happen;
How do I do it?
This will be the question.
Whatever you are doing in your life,
whether you are a peasant or a politician
whether you are a police man or a doctor
whether you are a lawyer or an engineer,
whatever jobs we are doing, let’s do it well,
this is the only way to build a nation.
Nation building does not happen with great speeches and slogans;
it happens because of every one of us do
whatever we are doing at a different level of function.
Whatever we are doing happens out of dedication and commitment
to creating a new nation.
Here we are sitting on a possibility,
a threshold where we can move a huge mass of humanity
from one level of living to another.
This is a possibility which is historic;
very few generations have ever had this opportunity,
It’s my wish that every Indian should strive for this and make this happen.
I particularly appeal to those who are the political class in this country
‘please do your politics at the time of election;
rest of the time allow the governments elected
either in the center or in the states
to function in a sensible manner,
in a way that will be beneficial for people.
Please let politics happen only a month before election time.
Rest of the time
let everyone of us work to make this nation into a great possibility.
Questioner: Good evening sir.
Can you tell me that the work pressures are going on.
And because of that stress is created.
So that one is what to do about the stress,
second is how to differentiate and
leave the stress of that work pressure in the office
and go back home and forget about it.
Sadhguru: Stress.
You know a few years ago,
or many years ago, when I first went to United States,
wherever I went,
people were talking about stress management.
I couldn’t understand this.
Because in my understanding,
we manage things which are precious to us,
which are valuable to us.
You want to manage
your family, your wealth, your business, your organizations;
and why would anybody want to manage stress?
This is something I couldn’t understand.
It took me a while to understand
that these people have assumed that stress is a part of their life.
Stress is not a part of your life.
Stress is not because of the work that you are doing.
Stress is just your inability
to manage your body, your mind, your emotions and your energies.
If your mind took instructions from you,
would you keep it stressful or blissful?
What’s your choice?
What’s your choice?
If your mind took instructions from you,
would you keep it stressful or blissful?
Blissful.
For yourself definitely it’s blissfulness.
What you want for your neighbor may be debatable.
But what you want for yourself is definitely highest level of pleasantness, isn’t it?
So why is it when you are seeking pleasantness,
your mind is creating unpleasantness.
Stress means unpleasantness;
Why is your mind is creating unpleasantness for you?
Your mind is supposed to be working for you not against you.
So if it is working against you
we haven’t figured something about this mind isn’t it?
Something very fundamental we have misunderstood about the nature of the mind,
how it functions and what we can do about it?
So
stress is not because of the nature of your work.
because
You go and ask a chapparasi, he is stressful;
you ask the prime minister, he is stressful.
He looks stressful.
In between everybody is stressful.
So which job is not stressful?
It is not the job which is stressful.
It is you, who is stressful.
Job is never stressful. Isn’t it?
It is just that your mind is not taking instructions from you.
So we need to read the instruction manual;
we have done something fundamentally wrong
as to how to handle this human mechanism.
It’s a very complex technology.
We need to address it with little more attention.
Questioner: We have been asked to recite certain slokams since childhood.
One among them is purnamitham
So I want you to throw some light on this.
Sadhguru: It's a secret question,
in the language that you cannot understand.
So
purna means, you know what purna means,
all of you know
purna means complete or absolute.
So everything is absolute,
I am absolute, the Creator is absolute, everything else is absolute,
chanting every day
but in your experience nothing is absolute,
everything is threateningly,
anxiously unstable,
freaking you out.
So unstable,
day-to-day realities yourself,
people around you,
situations around you,
your social realities,
financial realities,
everything seems to be terribly threatening to a point
where you’re becoming paranoid.
If you see… you will see this,
if you go… a child is sleeping,
if you go and touch the child like this (Gestures)
he will open his eyes like this. (Gestures)
But most adults you touch them like this, bha, bhae. (Laughter)
Very few adults
if you go touch them, they can… do that,
yes very few.
Most of them will come up bha like this,
simply because every moment of their life,
they’re anxious about the realities of their existence.
They can go on chanting purnamitham… whatever (Laughs)
but nothing is complete,
nothing is absolute,
everything is so dicey.
In their mind life looks so dicey,
so absolutely inconceivable
that they are threatened by every situation in their life.
Anxiety rules
too many human minds are ruined by anxiety.
Now, you going on chanting this,
it is not wrong if you are using it as a reminder;
if you are just bullshitting yourself,
that everything is complete,
everything is great,
everything is fantastic...
Two ladies met,
this really happened,
really (Laughter)
after very long time.
They were in high school together,
they had never met for twenty years,
today they met.
And they met in a fancy restaurant
and as soon as they sat down,
one of them started off, ‘You know what we just bought a silver ghost for our butler
to go and buy vegetables every day.’
You know what’s a silver ghost?
You don’t know,
it’s a Rolls Royce.
‘Oh but for our Chinese gardener he likes a Mercedes,
so we bought a Mercedes for him because he has to bring so many things.
And you know for our dog Tierra (Few Laugh)
we actually made a diamond Tierra for her.’
As this person went on saying this,
the other person said, ’Wow that’s fantastic,
wow that’s fantastic,
wow that’s really fantastic,’
it went on like this.
After exhausting everything,
‘What have you being doing?’
She said, ‘I have been attending a charms school.’
‘How quaint, what is a charms school,
what do they do there?’
‘Well they teach us to say fantastic instead of bullshit.’
(Laughter and Applause)
So if you are using it like this, no good.
If you are using it as a reminder
if you are using it as a reminder to remind yourselves somewhere,
the whole universe is complete by its own nature
otherwise it wouldn’t be going on like this, isn’t it?
Somewhere you’re missing the point,
because you are not a living being.
The reason why you’re missing it is you are not a living being,
you are a psychological being.
You are a bundle of thoughts, emotions, ideas, opinions, prejudices,
all kinds of things.
In this, there is no completeness,
this is just a mess.
But leave the rubbish that’s happening in your mind;
just look at this,
you are not running it,
it’s breathing by itself,
it’s beating the heart,
the livers are functioning,
kidneys are functioning,
everything is happening quite complete, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Now if you look at this body,
if you look at the planet,
if you look at the cosmos and said,
‘purnamitham, purna…’ wow it’s real, isn’t it?
You look at your mind and all the rubbish that’s happening there
and say purnam…what purnam? (Laughter)
If you sit here as a living being,
everything is complete;
if you sit here as a bundle of thoughts, emotions and rubbish;
if you sit here as just a psychological being you are a case. (Laughter)
So, do not utter these things from that context,
just look up these billions of stars, not billions of stars,
billions of galaxies actually
everything happening. Hmm?
Somebody MBA is sitting and doing it, managing it? (Laughter)
I am asking you,
which university did they study to manage this?
No, something is very complete, isn’t it?
Something is very absolute which makes all these things happen.
If you are in touch with it;
purnamitham hundred percent true for you.
If you are just here,
it looks like one big lie and it is a lie.
It’s time to at least become a living being,
don’t become anything else,
just become a piece of life and you will see it’s complete,
absolutely complete.
If you sit here as a mind, always incomplete,
eternally incomplete,
it cannot be complete because that’s not its nature.
So people who said this;
people who made these chants, they are living beings,
they are not minds or mindsets.
(Sadhguru): Surya kriya is a
powerful process of
activating the sun within you.
When I say activating the sun within you
sun is in every aspect of
whatever you see on this planet.
Fundamentally it is a solar energy
which is driving life in this planet.
So when we do Surya kriya
we want to generate that energy within the system.
There is a cousin to Surya kriya
which is Surya Namaskar.
Surya Namaskar is a kind of practice
that evolved out of Suryka Kriya
Surya Namaskar is largely
a way of saluting the sun
but surya kriya has more spiritual intentions
Surya Kriya has more
powerful connotations attached to it.
The different dimensions of Surya Kriya
physically it is a powerful process.
The way it trains your mind
there are few parallels to it.
There are mystical dimensions to it.
There are,
it is a way of adjusting your body
to the celestial activity
So this is the way of adjusting your system
not just your physical system
your energy system
your psychological process
to the celestial geometry
so that you are in sync with the existence.
The sun'’s cycles
happen in once in twelve and quarter to twelve and half years.
The moon'’s cycle happens in 28 days
If your physiological cycles run
in sync with the sun'’s cycles
your physical wealth would be great
your mental balance will be perfect
and your life will happen effortlessly.
So the idea of yoga is
that your body becomes a possibility not a barrier;
if that has to happen
everything within your system
should function with least amount of resistance
with least amount of friction
The idea of Hata Yoga is
to knead the system
not just the physical body
to knead the whole system in such a way
that all these frictions are
machined out
or smoothened out in such a way
that after sometime if you sit here
there is absolutely no sense of friction within you.
You have only the outside to deal with.,
Nothing else.
There is nothing that
this is not an issue anymore.
This being,
this mechanism is no more an issue.
Only if it becomes like that
you can deal with the outside
with the phenomenal ease and capability.
Now coming to Surya Kriya ,
Surya Kriya is a phenomenal process in that direction
to bring smoothness to the system.
This smoothness to the system
or this well oiled feeling within yourself
will not come
unless you are in sync with the larger system
which is the solar system.
The larger body of who you are
is the solar system.
That is why this is called as Hata Yoga
(Sadhguru): We have a significant event coming up
United Nations has declared the World International Yoga Day (Applause).
That means those of you who are living in the Yoga Center
or associated with the Yoga Center means this is your day.
Tch, first time in the world you know (Laughs).
Since Adiyogi, over 15000 years ago,
since then many things have happened in terms of propagating yoga,
in terms of reaching out,
many administrations in the form of kings took to yoga and did things.
When Krishna was here,
this was… maybe people don’t recognize him unfortunately
for this tremendous effort that he took
to have political system and the spiritual process fused as one,
this is what he wanted to achieve.
And he’s not being credited with this.
People are only talking about the excessive butter he might have eaten (Laughter)
and the girls and the flute and the cows and the dung and whatever (Laughter).
No, that is not what his life is about.
His life is that he strived throughout his adult life
to bring the political process and the spiritual process as one.
He started over 1000 ashrams across the northern plains of this country.
Nobody acknowledges him for that,
this is the body of his work
because he did not want spiritual process to be an archival process somewhere in some ashram.
He wanted this to spread across the society,
above all those who rule the nations must be spiritual in nature.
This was the intention
and always mingling and handling kings and their affairs
but he himself chose never to become a king.
He was a kingmaker in many ways but never a king,
he had the armies to become a king.
There was land on which his people lived,
so he could have become a king effortlessly.
If he wanted to become the king
particularly the Pandavas, who would have given up their whole kingdom and said,
“You be the king,”
there’s no question about that.
But he never ever became a king,
only wanting to get the spiritual process and the political process together.
This was the whole effort.
So it’s wonderful today that the United Nations has declared this
and a head of a state is talking about yoga, this is a big thing (Laughs) (Applause).
We’ve been working to do this
particularly in the last twelve to fifteen years
we’ve made many efforts to bring people,
who are the leaders of nations to have some spiritual process in their life.
For the first time the head of a major nation on the planet
is talking about yoga in public in International Forum,
and for the first time one hundred and seventy-seven countries
get together to pass a resolution.
Never before in the history of United Nations,
hundred and seventy-seven countries have voted for anything,
anything for that matter (Applause).
So the coming year is a historic event in many ways
because this could be a kind of a foundation stone
to make scientific approach to the inner well-being of the human being,
a worldwide thing
that if you want to be well you don’t have to seek heaven’s help,
you can turn inward and fix it.
You can turn inward and create well-being,
you don’t have to look up,
you don’t have to look down,
you don’t have to seek celestial help.
The human well-being or the quality of human well-being
essentially is originating from within.
If you want to fix it or if you want to mess it up both can be done only within you.
This is the message, when you say there is a International Yoga Day
this is what it means the world is beginning to accept
human well-being is not in heaven, it’s within us.
It’s a tremendous step for the world
and here we have big plans what we want to do in the next five to six months
and what happens later.
A vertical scale up of yogic practice on the planet can happen.
We have very big plans for the coming six months.
We want committed people,
we want committed teams across the country
and in the rest of the world that
who will really go by this plan to see that
this shift of attempting human well-being,
instead of heaven we shift inward.
This can be truly scaled up in the coming year.
We have a… a very elaborate plan.
We want many of you to become a part of this plan in a committed way,
not off and on but in a committed way
because this is a historic event
and it’s wonderful that it is timed at the time or
beginning of Dakshinayana.
That is, on June 21st is the International Yoga Day,
it indicates the shifting of the relationship
between the sun and the planet from North to South.
When Adiyogi turned south and became Dakshinamurty to deliver this whole dimension of yoga,
this knowledge or this whole sphere of understanding
the mechanics of human being in relation to the mechanics of the cosmos
and how one can transcend,
how this (Referring to oneself) can either be a tiny little creature
or how this can become a cosmic being.
This possibility he opened up on this day
and it’s truly wonderful that day is being recognized as the International Yoga Day.
So plans
big plans means you know lot of work. (Laughter)
So let’s not talk about work today
but it’ll come, lots of work.
I was thinking 2015 I’m going to step back
and start practicing retirement a little bit
but no, 2015 is going to be full throttle (Laughs).
So you should not… (Applause)
you should not try to tire or retire (Laughter) in the coming year.
No tiring, no retiring, okay,
full throttle, are you up?
(Sadhguru): You know, Charles Darwin
You’ve heard of Charles Darwin?
Participant: Yes.
Sadhguru: An English man
That’s why I'm asking. (Laughs)
Two hundred years ago born
but about hundred and fifty years ago he said
you were all monkeys –
not me, I'm not saying, he said
you were all monkeys, your tail fell away, you became… you became human;
you know the story.
When you were a monkey you did not aspire to be human,
nature just pushed you on,
you did not choose,
but once you’ve become a human,
if you want to evolve from here on
you have to consciously evolve,
otherwise there is no other way.
When I say you have to consciously evolve
what you call as human is not an established state,
it's a flux.
This moment you can be godlike,
next moment you can be a brute.
You have seen with yourself
this moment you're wonderful,
next moment you're nasty,
next moment you're beautiful,
next moment you're ugly –
is this not happening to you?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So a human is not a being, he is a becoming,
he is an ongoing process,
nothing is fixed.
You can be whichever way you want to be.
This freedom that you have,
that you're not fixed like every other creature on this planet,
if you're aware,
this is the greatest benediction because you can make yourself whatever you want.
If you're unaware, this is the greatest curse.
Humanity is right now suffering this freedom.
Humanity is not suffering bondage as people are saying.
Humanity is suffering its freedom.
If your life was also fixed like every other creature,
you would have gone about without any stress,
you didn’t have to do yoga, isn't it? (Laughter)
Isn't it so?
If your life was fixed like every other creature on this planet,
you wouldn’t be stressed.
Only because it is not fixed,
you can be anything you want,
anything… just about anything can happen in your mind,
this is why the stress, isn't it?
Participants: Yes. (Laughter)
Sadhguru: Being human means
See, suppose a tiger is born
a tiger is not sitting and worrying how to become a good tiger. (Laughter)
Just get enough food, he will become a good tiger.
He's not worried,
‘Will I become a good tiger,
will I end up as a house cat?’ (Laughter)
No such problems.
You're born as a human being,
but still how many things you have to do to be a good human being
and still you don’t know where you belong, isn't it?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Only in comparison with somebody you can say,
‘Compared to this person I'm little better.’
By yourself you don’t know where you belong. Isn't it so?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Isn't it so?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Because what is human is not an established state,
it is a possibility.
It is not a fixed state.
If this possibility has to be made use of,
there is a whole system of understanding that needs to happen.
Understanding the mechanics of
how this life functions and what we can do with it
this mechanics,
this technology,
this science we are referring to as yoga.
Sadhguru: So these eighty-four asanas
which are the fundamental yogasanas
are eighty-four ways
to make the body into a passage.
It is not necessary actually
for everybody to do eighty-four asanas.
If they do one, it is enough;
usually hata yogis
serious hata yogis who are taking Hata Yoga as their path to liberation
practice only one asana,
just one asana.
It is difficult for a thinking mind to understand
why would somebody spend his whole life
trying to sit in a particular way.
But if you learn to sit right,
if you just learn to hold your body right,
everything that you need to know in this universe you can know
because
this is known as asana siddhi.
If you can sit in a posture
stable and comfortable
for two and half hours
then we say you have attained to asana siddhi
that you are in absolute comfort
and at ease in a particular posture.
That is asana siddhi
if you achieve this
everything that you need to know one can know internally.
How is this possible?
How can by sitting everybody
you can know everything that you can know?
If you have a television at home,
television is just a box with a little bit of electronics in it
but it becomes a world by itself.
The whole world can stream into this place
that we call as a television
or this box that we call as a television
simply because there is a receiving mode.
If you set the antenna right,
if it is properly adjusted
then the whole world flows into its
into your place
or into this box.
If it is not set right,
same instrument,
it has everything but can't do anything.
–
This is how human being is
a human being is
an individual human being is who he is
only because of what he perceives.
Only because of what he or she perceives
an individual human being becomes whoever they are.
Right now you are who you are
only because of whatever you have perceived in your life till now
and you will be who you will be
only because of what you will perceive in future.
Whatever you perceive
is what makes you whatever you are today.
So the whole system of yoga
is only interested in enhancing perception.
So if you hold the posture right,
if your alignment is right
and if it matches with the cosmic alignment in some way
eighty-four alignments
If one gets into these eighty-four postures
or even masters a single posture
and approaches the remaining eighty-three through that
then everything that has happened in the creation till this moment
one can know
because the memory of that is right here within your system
in a
let us say in a codified way
it can be activated and ignited
if it touches another dimension outside of yourself.
So asanas are powerful means
Yogasanas are powerful means to connect.
I… I do not want you to forget
what yoga means.
Yoga means union;
union means two have become one.
Two is just this
there are only two in the existence
you and the rest of the existence.
In the rest of the existence
you may identify this one, that one, that one
but essentially there are only two,
you and the rest of the existence
because there are only two dimensions of experience within you.
You do not know what is up and down in this cosmos,
you do not know what is forward and backward in this cosmos,
you do not know anything.
These are all things that we’ve made up for convenience.
The only experiential reality is
there is something called outward
and there is something called inward.
So these are the two dimensions of experience
inner and outer.
So yoga means
to bring a union between these
inner and outer,
you and the rest,
you and the other.
When there is no you and the other,
there is just you and you,
that is yoga.
So asanas are a physical manifestation of approaching this,
a physical form of approaching this ultimate union
because physical body is the easiest thing to work with.
If you try to do something with your mind
it will pay to… it will play too many tricks.
At least with the body
you know whether it's doing it right or not doing it right,
whether it's cooperating or not cooperating.
A mind, if you push it too hard
it will play all kinds of tricks with you,
it will make you believe all kinds of things
and dump you the next day
but body is not like that,
it is a reliable factor,
if you work with it sensibly
the yogasanas will definitely lead
yogasanas will definitely lead
to the possibility of ultimate union.
In the meantime by getting into the postures
before all this alignment with the ultimate happens,
inner alignment happens
which will naturally achieve a chemistry of healthfulness,
joyfulness
and blissfulness,
and above all balance.
Balance is something that modern societies have ignored
and they’re paying a huge price for today.
Whatever may be your intelligence,
whatever may be your competence
and education and qualifications,
if you do not have the necessary balance
you will not succeed,
you will not go very far in your life.
So the most important thing
for people who are seeking to be successful,
people whether they’re working in corporate sector,
or they’re political,
or they’re military
or whatever field,
the most important thing is balance.
Only if you have a balance
which is not disturbed by external situations,
will you be capable of making use of
the competence and intelligence that you carry within you,
otherwise the most wonderful qualities that one may have
will all go waste
simply because of lack of balance.
And Hata Yoga means balance.
Language is a kind of a conspiracy between two people.
When we speak in English,
some who do not understand English language,
they’re sitting like this (Gestures)
because they’re left out of the conspiracy, tch (Laughter).
Suddenly I speak in Tamil, all the Tamil people start laughing,
English people (Gestures) (Laughter) –
they’re left out of the conspiracy (Laughter).
Because it is a conspiracy
it’s a widespread conspiracy
so you don’t think on those terms.
Suppose all of you know one language,
just me and one more person know another language
and I start speaking in that language, all of you (Gestures) (Laughter).
“What’s happening?”
Conspiracy, isn’t it (Laughs)?
Sound is the substance of Creation.
Meanings are made up in human minds.
If you can evolve a sound within you
When I say evolve a sound
Sounds are of various kinds.
There are some which are very refined sounds,
there are some which are gross;
depending upon the nature of the reverberation that it is.
Or in other words,
everything is sound
the rock is a certain kind of sound,
the tree is a certain kind of sound,
this is one kind of reverberation,
that is another kind of reverberation.
The very air that you’re breathing is another kind of sound.
The very body is another kind of sound.
Same rock here and the same rock there as Dhyanalinga
but a completely different kind of reverberation.
So the same sound can be taken and refined to a certain level.
If you already do not know about this
today science is entering this space,
but in the yogic systems
this is something that we’ve always worked with
today modern science is talking about
how both sound and light are reverberations,
if you multiply something like a hundred decibel sound,
if you double it forty times over in hertz,
you would arrive at a place where mathematically it’s become light.
But this is something that we’ve always done within ourselves.
If you take a sound and incubate it within you,
you can incubate the sound with a refined reverberation of your consciousness.
The body is one kind of reverberation,
thought is another kind of reverberation,
emotion another kind of reverberation,
consciousness a completely different kind of reverberation.
What we refer to as consciousness is the most refined reverberation.
What is beyond that we say, ‘Shiva’
that means that which is not,
because its reverberation is such that you cannot even know it is there.
It is utter stillness, but there is a reverberation in that also.
Now, if you take a sound into you
and if you can incubate it in your consciousness,
this sound can slowly be transformed into light.
In the sense,
you
at least the calendar artists know these things,
somehow nobody else.
Somebody is sitting, “Aum Namah Shivaya,”
you will see immediately calendar artists will put light (Laughs)
because somewhere he knows
if he masters the sound and incubates the sound within himself in a certain way,
it will transform itself into light.
Different reverberations do different things to people, there’s no doubt about that.
With mantra, with music people have noticed these things –
different types of reverberations do different things to different individuals.
But if you transform a reverberation from one dimension to another
by incubating it within yourself consciously,
one can know light from within
and nobody around will miss it either.
(Questioner): Sadhguru you mentioned about the fact that,
I mean a true devotee is one who is willing to, like give himself up and his agendas.
How does one work with this philosophy
in let’s say any work, in this corporate world, or
(Sadhguru): You cannot,
you just cannot because you have your own agendas.
So don’t waste your time on devotion.
You must explore other ways.
Devotion means taking your emotion to its highest pitch,
yes?
Isn’t it so?
You have various kinds of emotions.
Devotion is held as the highest form of emotion
because it’s least entangling.
It’s liberating.
So taking your emotion to its highest pitch.
Devotees are insane people;
they’re not reasonable people as far as the world is concerned.
They’re very beautiful people within themselves
but as far as the society is concerned they’re usually insane people.
Your Mirabai’s,
I don’t know if you’ve heard of the South Indian devotees.
Akka Mahadevi’s,
all these people are very insane people.
You can’t live with them.
After they’re gone you can worship them.
When they’re there,
nobody could understand what the hell is happening
with these people?
I know Mira is so worshiped in the Northern part of the country.
There is a wonderful book called, ‘Cuckold,’
written by Kiran Nagarkar.
This is life perspective of Mirabai’s husband.
Let’s say you have a wife
who believes she is Krishna’s wife, not yours.
All the time,
she’s going into such states that it’s like Krishna is with him,
with her.
She’s dancing with him,
she’s loving him,
she’s kissing him,
she’s everything, okay?
She’s so deeply involved.
Now you are the husband.
Are you going to appreciate her,
appreciate her devotion or go insane with your own problems, isn’t it?
So this book is the husband’s perspective of Mira’s life,
how he experienced Mira.
Because devotees are like that.
They don’t belong to the logical dimension of life.
They are of a different this thing.
Devotion is one of the quickest ways to attain
but you won’t fit into normal social and other situations.
It’s not possible.
If you want to fit into normal situations,
your family and social situations and still pursue spirituality
I’m not saying devotion is completely absent in you,
there is a part of you,
your emotions are there so naturally certain amount of devotion
happens here and there
but you can’t choose it as a path
because you still want life to happen the way you want it.
When you want life to happen the way you want it,
you should just learn to use your body and mind the way you want it,
then only things will happen the way you want it, isn’t it?
You can also attain through your intelligence.
You can also attain through your physical action,
you can also attain by transforming your inner energies
but you’re not just any one of them, you’re a combination.
So, we’re choosing a combination of these things
so that without disturbing external realities,
you can still evolve.
If you want to preserve the external realities and still evolve
then naturally there are compromises
you go slowly.
You’re not bothered what happens to your corporate world,
or to your husband, or wife or child or anything.
You just want to grow,
then it’s very quick.
You want to preserve this also but you want something else to happen,
that is why we’re going slowly.
With different people we do different things.
There are some people who are not concerned about all those things.
With them we work in a different way.
Now you are people who want to preserve the external situation
but still you want an internal possibility.
So we are going slowly on combination of all these things,
not putting anything to a high pitch.
Everything trying to raise to the next level of experience.
Not to the ultimate.
We’re just seeing how to push you to the next level of experience.
Devotion and corporate world will not go.
Devotion and family life will not go.
Devotion and anything will not go.
Devotion means everything else has to dissolve.
That’s why I’m saying don’t talk devotion, it’s just deception.
Some moments when your experience raises to a certain pitch,
a moment of devotion may happen to you.
Just wait for that moment it’s very wonderful
but don’t try to pursue devotion as your policy
because there’s a very deep deception in it.
Sadhguru chants Sanskrit chant Jananam Sukhadam
Sadhguru: Good evening.
Good evening everyone.
Alan Kasujja: You know,
you really need to explain certain things to me today.
Some of the things that have been happening here that don’t make sense to me.
Thank you very much by the way for joining us in this conversation.
Let’s start with the lighting of... ____ (Unclear)
lit by Sudhir and the rest of them,
what does that mean?
Sadhguru: An oil lamp,
if you create a certain amount of fire,
it creates...
After all, the entire existence,
the whole universe, including yourself and myself and everybody else,
is just a play of five elements
of earth,
water,
air,
fire
and space.
So fire –
just you get fired up (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: Ah (Laughter)! Okay.
And then the chant,
the two-minute chant.
And that was preceded by some motions of your hands.
And this is me being curious.
I’m sure there’ll be a lot of other people curious about what’s going on,
so that we get a better understanding.
Any curious people at all? Yeah?
Almost everybody’s curious about what’s going on.
So then the chant,
what was the chant,
what were you saying there?
Sadhguru: The chant is about this.
Birth is sweet – you know,
we’re born and life is on and suddenly a child is bubbling with life,
it’s a very sweet happening.
But death is compassion.
People think death is some kind of a terrible thing.
I want you to imagine,
suppose you can’t die,
what would you do?
Alan Kasujja: You’re saying death is not a bad thing?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: It’s not a bad thing, death?
Sadhguru: No, I’m asking you,
suppose you could not die,
what would you do?
The best thing about life is...
The best thing about life is,
you will never fail because everybody shall pass (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: I needed to get these things out of the way (Sadhguru laughs)
before we begin our conversation because...
Sadhguru: And… And the next part of the chant is
We may understand life in so many different ways.
Essentially, it's a certain play of time and energy.
Time is slipping away.
As we sit here, it’s slipping away.
We may think many things in our minds,
socially we may think we’re doing many things.
But as far as this body is concerned,
it is making its journey straight to the grave,
without wavering for a moment.
As we sit here,
it is moving in that direction.
So the only way you can maximize life
is by tweaking up your energy levels in a certain way.
If you live for the same amount of time,
till...
still you lived more because
this combination of time and energy
Time is anyway flowing
but you can play with energy in such a way
that you can raise the nature of your life,
the experience of your life,
the profoundness of your life.
And above all,
move from many entanglements,
which seem to define and describe life for most people,
towards a... a limitless sense of freedom
or boundlessness within you.
This is not because you are not bound by time,
you’re still bound by time.
But because you’ve tweaked your energy in a certain way,
suddenly you look like you’re above that.
Alan Kasujja: Interesting. Sadhguru,
it’s an honor to talk to you
and thank you very much for making time to come to Uganda.
And you know,
the most obvious questions that will be in many people’s minds
and some of them might be here actually – is
who’s this guy,
you know. Who is he?
He has a long beard,
I described him
I described you to some people...
Sadhguru: You’re trying too
Alan Kasujja: No, so who’s this guy?
And so when they come in here
and there’s this whole setup
and there’s this glowing tribute with someone saying that
you’re as powerful as an... as the uni... you know,
power extends across the universe,
I thought to myself,
“Is this guy god?
Who is this guy?”
And it would be interesting if you helped us understand who you are
and where you come from
and how you ended up in Uganda (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: You’re asking for a long story (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: We have time (Laughter).
Sadhguru: I... I’m just seeing how to abridge the story
(Laughs).
See,
I grew up being a super skeptic
super, super skeptic.
I have a million questions about everything.
I did not identify myself
with my family,
nor the local religion,
nor the social structures,
nor the political structures,
nor even the nationality of where I was born.
Because I did not identify myself with anything,
though I was involved with everything,
I did not belong to anything,
which gave me a certain freedom of looking at everything the way it is.
Because the moment you get identified with something,
you become prejudiced in a certain way,
you look at everything from that context.
So I had no context,
I was just a bursting life.
And as I was telling you,
restless –
restless not because of anything,
I was very joyful and peaceful,
that was not an issue,
restless because I knew there is something more
but I did not know what that something more is.
So it kind of drove me to all kinds of places.
I crisscrossed India on my motorcycle.
But then, you know
I was probably nineteen,
almost twenty at that time.
I went to the Nepalese border.
Till then,
I did not know there is something called a passport.
Today a five-year-old kid would know (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: Really?
Sadhguru: I did not know.
I’ve been riding since I’m eleven, without license.
When I became eighteen, I got my license
and I thought that’s my passport to the world (Laughs).
Suddenly they stopped me and asked,
“Where’s your passport?”
I said, “What is that?”
They said, “There’s something else you need to cross the border.”
So I came all the way back to South India.
Then I decided I’ll equip myself with the needed money
and whatever the documents needed
and I’m going to ride around the world.
So for this I started a business.
I thought I’ll make some money. Then...
Alan Kasujja: What business?
Sadhguru: Initially I started a farm,
then I got into construction,
then I got into brick-making.
And in about five years’ time,
I became very successful.
I had my hands in about half-a-dozen businesses.
For those days, I was very successful,
by those standards.
So everybody is clapping their hands and saying,
“You’re doing great.”
So, I’m in this kind of state where I’m cocky and
You know,
when everything is working your way,
the planets don’t go around the sun,
they go around you (Few laugh).
So all the planets were spinning around me
and I’m...
everybody is saying, “You’re great.”
So I’m going on like this.
One afternoon,
between two business meetings,
I had...
Please if you can keep your cameras down, please,
it’s...
It’ll be posted on the YouTube.
You can download it,
okay (Few laugh)?
Don’t waste your time, be with me (Laughs).
One afternoon,
between two business meetings,
I had nothing much to do.
So I come from a town called Mysore.
Are people familiar with Mysore?
Mysore city?
Participants: Yes.
Alan Kasujja: Almost everybody,
this is Kampala though
Sadhguru: So (Laughs),
there’s a small hill in Mysore called Chamundi Hill.
The culture and the tradition of the time,
especially for the youth was –
if we want to test our motorcycles,
we went up Chamundi hill,
if we want to party, we went up Chamundi Hill.
Time 77:17
Alan Kasujja: To party?
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Alan Kasujja: You used to party (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: I... Right now, I’m always in a party (Laughter).
Can’t you see (Laughs)?
So, if you fall in love,
you got to go up Chamundi Hill,
if you fall out, you must go up Chamundi Hill (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: How many times...
How many times did you make that trip?
Sadhguru: Ah (Says dismissively) (Laughter).
And if you have nothing to do,
you have to go up Chamundi Hill (Laughter/Applause).
So on this afternoon, I had nothing much to do,
so I rode up Chamundi Hill.
I know this hill very well,
I’ve trekked in these hills,
I’ve camped in these hills, I’ve...
As a seven, eight-year-old child...
Why am I telling you all this?
If I found ten rupees in those days,
I would just leave a note
and I would vanish into the jungle.
Alan Kasujja: It’s called theft, right?
Sadhguru: Hmm? No.
Alan Kasujja: No, helping yourself to it.
Sadhguru: No, no, it was given to me.
If I had ten rupees, I’m gone.
Alan Kasujja: Oh!
Sadhguru: And from the age of seven,
I earned my own pocket money right through (Laughs),
never borrowed...
never took any money from my parents,
so don’t worry about theft (Laughter).
The thing is, I went off into the hills.
If I had enough food for four days,
I’m gone for four days.
They’re searching all over,
police complaints,
looking all over the town.
One thing they don’t know is, I’m in the jungle.
Alan Kasujja: Doing what?
Sadhguru: Oh, I walked around, familiarized
myself with every other life,
I caught a bunch of snakes,
I caught all kinds of insects,
I...
I was learning life, paying attention to all kinds of life.
There’s more life in the jungle than in Kampala, you know
(Laughter)?
More variety, I mean (Laughs),
and more numbers too.
So I know this place very well.
So that afternoon,
I went and sat up on a rock that I was...
very familiar to me.
My eyes were still open.
I’ve been practicing yoga since twelve years of age
but that was mainly for physical prowess and mental prowess,
which it definitely did give me, it did set me apart
among any group of people.
But I never knew there is something else to it.
That afternoon, I sat there,
my eyes were still open.
Till that moment,
I thought this is me and that is somebody.
I have no issues with that somebody
but this is me and that is someone else.
Suddenly I did not know
which is me and which is not me.
The very air I breathe,
the rock I was sitting upon,
the atmosphere around me,
everything became me.
I thought this madness lasted for about maybe ten-fifteen minutes
but when I came back to my normal senses,
about four-and-a-half hours had passed.
For the first time in my adult life,
tears –
me and tears were impossible –
tears are flowing to a point my shirt is all wet.
I’ve always been peaceful and happy,
life is working out the way I want,
I’m young and successful
and no problems.
It is just that every cell in my body was bursting with ecstasy.
Tears are just dripping like this.
So when I shook my skeptical head and asked
what’s happening to me,
the only thing that my mind could tell me was,
maybe I’m going off my rocker.
Alan Kasujja: Which happens (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: So when I spoke to the closest of my friends
and tried to tell them something is happening to me,
the questions that came to me is only this –
“What did you drink?
What did you pop?” you know (Laughter)?
What...
Why I’m saying this is,
I had no context of any kind.
Something was happening within me for which I had no any kind of knowledge,
there was nobody around me to tell me what this is about.
All I knew is
I’ve hit a goldmine and I don’t want to lose it
because if I simply sit like this,
two minutes
I feel it’s two minutes,
seven-eight hours have just passed away like that.
Once I sat like this and I thought it’s twenty-five, thirty minutes
but when I opened my eyes,
it's thirteen days gone by.
Alan Kasujja: You sat in one place for thirteen days?
Sadhguru: Yes.
I... I sat there only for twenty-five, thirty minutes in my experience.
By the time I opened my eyes,
there was a huge crowd.
India being what it is,
they were pulling my legs and asking (Laughs)
what’ll happen to their business,
when will their daughters get married,
and all this stuff (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: And... And... And... And...
You still get a lot of that –
when is my daughter getting married
and what’s happening to my... to my business?
Sadhguru: I don’t tell them anymore
when their daughters will get married (Laughs).
It’s the daughter’s business, when she gets married (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: And then,
that’s an interesting story,
it begins there,
ends up in Uganda now,
we’re sitting down in front...
Sadhguru: Hey, I’m not ending up here (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: You’re not.
So we’re in Uganda at the moment.
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Alan Kasujja: How did... Why Uganda?
How did you end up here?
Okay, you say you’re not ending up here,
I understand that (Sadhguru laughs) but why Uganda?
Sadhguru: Africa has been on my mind for some time
but my schedules have been so killing
that you know,
it’s not been possible to stop over in Africa.
So when we thought
which country or
when people started inviting us here
I always go everywhere by invitation.
so the invitations here were strong,
the ambassador of India
and the Mehta family and many others,
who have done programs
All the business magnates here,
they all did their Inner Engineering some time ago
because some of our teachers came here and taught programs.
Since then, there has been a strong pitch.
So,
we took this week off and we’re in Africa.
Not just Uganda,
I’m also touching Kenya and South Africa.
Alan Kasujja: Let’s give the Sadhguru a round of applause,
ladies and gentlemen (Applause)
for… And now
Sadhguru: What’s that for?
Alan Kasujja: Yeah, because you’re here,
you’re welcome.
Now let’s talk about Uganda and (Laughter)...
When I was trying to prepare myself for this conversation,
I was wondering why should I be talking to you about Uganda
because, you know, your realities are different,
aren’t they?
This is Uganda,
it has its fair share of challenges,
you don’t know Uganda very well
and yet I’m here trying to talk to you about Uganda...
Sadhguru: I may not know Uganda very well...
I may not know Uganda very well,
I know human beings perfectly well,
wherever the hell they are (Laughs) (Applause).
Wherever they are, fundamentally they are same.
It’s just different cultural expressions,
different languages,
different styles of doing things.
But fundamentally, wherever you go,
human problems and human aspirations are same.
Alan Kasujja: What are the most common ones do you think?
Sadhguru: Com...
Alan Kasujja: The most common problems
or challenges that human beings face...
Sadhguru: The most fundamental problem with human beings is,
what they need to fix within themselves,
they’re trying to fix the entire world for that (Applause).
This is happening everywhere.
People are talking about world peace,
but they can’t sit in one place for one minute peacefully
(Laughter),
but they’re talking (Laughs) about making the world peaceful.
It’s never going to work.
If you don’t know how to keep your mind feace… peaceful,
how are you going to make the world peaceful?
What you see in the world is
just a larger manifestation of what’s happening in individual minds.
So, if we just want to do a political slogan,
we can shout,
“World peace!”
and go away.
But if we’re truly interested,
then we have to have a lifelong commitment
of bringing peace to individual people.
Without individual salvation,
there is no universal salvation.
Alan Kasujja: And you make an important point
because Uganda is trying to transform itself.
We’re trying to come from where we are now,
which is a country this...
that’s struggling in many respects.
It’s done well in many ways
but it also still has a long way to go.
So it begins with the individual, isn’t it?
Sadhguru: So when you say long way to go,
where do you want to go?
Do you want to become another state in United States (Laughter)?
Is that what you’re aspiring for?
Alan Kasujja: I wish President Museveni was here,
President Museveni would have answered that question (Laughter).
Sadhguru: No. Mr. T is coming, okay?
Alan Kasujja: Okay (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: So, what I’m saying is,
it’s very important, when I look at a country like this,
which is naturally so beautiful
Nature has been immensely kind to you,
you don’t know what it means to live in harsh conditions of nature.
This is a beautiful, beautiful country.
I know if you go by...
Right now, the world is on a madness of
everything bigger –
bigger home,
bigger car,
bigger this, bigger that. Instead of all this everything making bigger,
I think in Uganda (Laughs) you should think how to have a bigger lake.
Alan Kasujja: A bigger lake?
Sadhguru: Bigger lake.
Alan Kasujja: That’s more important than a bigger house?
Sadhguru: Because if you have all these other things bigger,
your lake will shrink.
This has happened
In India, we’re beginning to suffer this seriously.
In 1947, when we got Independence,
how much per capita potable water we had,
today we have only eighteen percent of that.
They’re saying by 2025,
we will have only seven percent.
This means Indians will be having bath in bottles,
not in tubs.
So this is where the world is going.
When nature has been good to you,
keeping it that way is the most important thing
for the well-being of the people (Applause).
The thing is,
for the human beings,
if they’re well-nourished
and there is a beautiful atmosphere around them
and their aspirations are tailored
according to the nature of what’s happening around them,
it’s better
than to go the way America has gone.
Because I want you to understand,
those aspirations and those standards were set up
when they believed
five percent of the people will rob the ninety-five percent of the people
to create the comforts and conveniences that they have.
Today, the Living Earth Statistics says
that if we have to provide
what an average American citizen has
to 7.3 billion people,
we need four-and-a-half planets.
But we have only half of it left
Alan Kasujja: And as a result of that...
You know, you say that we need to make things smaller
but I want to be like Sudhir (Laughter).
I want to have a big house,
I want to own Munyonyo,
I want to be able to send my children to the best schools possible,
you know, whas...
How do I do that while maintaining the balance
that you’re talking about?
Sadhguru: See, this is why in the world, if...
if we really want to...
want to be giving a world
to the next generation of people
or we want to hand over a ruin to next generation of people,
this is something we have to make up our minds
because this is one of the most important responsibilities
we have as a generation of people,
that is...
See, first of all,
we need to understand,
we are just baton carriers.
We’re just a small pop-up on this planet
and we will pop out,
okay?
So this small pop-up lives here
as if you are the last generation on the planet.
No,
one of the most important things in our lives is,
how the planet was given to us,
how life was given to us,
how we are,
we must leave the next generation in at least one step better place than where we are,
otherwise we have failed as a generation,
there’s no question about it.
Alan Kasujja: That is easy to say when you have food in your stomach.
Sadhguru: Yes, that’s why I’m saying.
Alan Kasujja: Without food in your stomach,
I don’t care about the future generation.
Sadhguru: Yes.
Alan Kasujja: I... I’m keen to make sure that my realities are taken care of.
Sadhguru: To have food in the stomach,
you don’t have to destroy the planet,
you have to nourish the planet.
Food comes from the planet,
not from the supermarket (Laughter/Applause).
So,
to...
to feed the population on this planet,
the way I see the soil and the atmosphere
and the climate the way it is,
I’m telling you,
this East Africa can be the bread basket for the entire world,
because twelve months of a year you can grow crops here
(Applause).
If you destroy this,
you will not be able to grow food even for yourself after some time.
This is happening seriously in India.
We have a 12,000-year history of agriculture in South India.
This is probably not known to most people –
12,000 years of agriculture.
Certain communities have been farming the same land
for over 8-10,000 years.
But today,
in one generation,
the soil condition is becoming in such a way,
there’s an alarming situation
that in fifteen-twenty years’ time,
we may not be able to grow anything
because the animals have been removed,
chemicals have been pumped in,
machines are roaring all the time.
Machines don’t replenish the soil,
it take animals,
it takes plants,
it takes trees to replenish the soil.
So, who we are (Laughs)
The very body that you carry is just soil, isn’t it?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: You must get it from me now,
otherwise one day you’ll anyway get it from the maggots
and it’ll be too late (Laughter).
It’s very important to understand,
who we are is just this soil.
Now, it is easy to talk when there is food in the stomach.
This is what I’m saying.
To put food in the stomach for all the seven-billion people,
is not a challenge
if we keep the planet in a certain way.
And above all,
at the beginning of twentieth century,
we were 1.6 billion people.
Why have we become 7.3 billion people in one century?
What’ wrong with us?
Irresponsible reproduction, isn’t it (Applause)?
Now, the reason
one main reason is
the life expectancy has increased on an average all across the world,
which is a great thing.
But when we learn to postpone death,
should we also not learn to postpone birth?
Does it make sense to you,
I’m asking (Applause)?
Alan Kasujja: But ultimately though, you know,
you talk about 7 billion people,
you talk about the planet,
but what about the individual, you know?
We come back to that individual and... and...
And my individual interests,
how do I best harness them or condition them,
so that they fit into society’s interests?
Because the truth of the matter is,
the way the world is organized,
certainly the world that I live in,
it’s a cutthroat competition.
Everybody’s competing for the resources
we have, everybody is trying to be a Mehta,
everybody is trying to be a Sudhir.
And as a result, you know,
it becomes very difficult.
So how do I as an individual then make sure
that my contribution to society is one that benefits everybody?
I know you’ve talked about the planet but how...
how do I do that?
Sadhguru: See, whoever you are right now,
whatever you are right now,
you would like to be something more
than what you’re right now.
Yes or no?
Sadhguru: Hello?
I’m talking to all of you?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: If that something more happens, what?
Something more.
If that something more happens,
what?
Participants: Something more.
Sadhguru: Something more.
So in installments, you want to go somewhere.
You want to expand.
So because you’re going in installments,
let me hasten you up a little bit
and I will make you the king or queen of this planet.
Don’t look at me hopefully (Laughter).
Do I look like someone who will commit such a blunder
If I make you the king or the queen of this planet,
will you be fulfilled, I’m asking you?
Participants: No.
Sadhguru: You will look at the stars.
So there is something within a human being,
which is longing to expand.
Because right now, you’re so limited in your identity
with your biology,
with your physicality,
because of this,
you’re trying to expand physically.
Physical expansion means –
if it finds a very basic physical,
biological expression,
this is called sexuality.
If you find an emotional expression,
this will be called love.
What all these things mean is,
something that is not you,
you’re trying to make it a part of yourself.
If it’s a physical process,
it’s called sexuality,
if it’s an emotional process, it’s called love,
if it’s a mental process,
it gets labeled as greed,
or ambition,
or conquest
or simply shopping (Few laugh/applaud) .
These are all different ways
to make something which is not a part of you,
part of yourself in some way.
But if it finds a conscious expression,
it’s called yoga.
Tch, that’s why we’re here, Sir.
Alan Kasujja: Yoga
And in that you say that
the body is the ultimate form of technology.
Sadhguru: No, that’s next.
But right now,
your identity that
your identity is so much with your physicality,
you’re trying to expand physically.
Because you’re trying to expand physically,
you will see it doesn’t matter,
if you get the solar system in your hands,
you will not be fulfilled,
if you get the galaxy, you’ll look for other galaxies,
because what a human being is looking for is not more.
When you pointed out these people and said,
“I want to be like this”,
you’re talking about
how can I have more?
What you’re looking for is not more,
you want all.
If you want all,
physical is not the way, isn’t it?
If you want to expand in a limitless way,
physical is not the way
because the nature of your physicality
is defined by a boundary.
We can call this a physical body
only because it has a boundary.
If you remove all these boundaries,
it is no more a physical thing.
Physicality is always defined by a boundary
but there is something within you,
longing to become boundless.
This longing to become boundless
is being misunderstood
as longing to have more.
More is not what it’s looking for,
this life (Referring to oneself) is looking for a limitless expansion.
If limitless expansion has to happen,
one has to transcend their perception
beyond their physical nature.
If your perception rises beyond physical nature,
then we use this horribly corrupted word,
spiritual.
Alan Kasujja: And we shall come to spiritual elements
a bit later.
Right now though,
let’s talk about politics.
It’s an interesting subject (Laughter).
Politics of a country, the politics of a country like Uganda...
Is politics a good thing?
Sadhguru: See, when we say politics,
what we are talking about –
how to govern a nation.
Or what we’re talking about is
how to make the lives of larger mass of people
who’re around us
Alan Kasujja: That’s the ideal description.
Sadhguru: That is the fundamental.
How it is conducted today is another matter.
That is because of variety of things,
because we chose democracy.
Once you say this is a democratic nation,
what this means is
any one of you tomorrow could become the leader of this nation,
that’s what it means.
Alan Kasujja: Really (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: Don’t... Don’t be so hopeless (Laughs) (Applause).
Yes.
In...
In...
Alan Kasujja: I know someone, who used to think that (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: In Indian languages,
democracy is described as jananayakam.
What this means it,
people are the leaders.
That’s what it means.
Well, right now, we have a Prime Minister in this...
in our country proving this,
that a tea-seller can become the Prime Minister of a nation
(Applause).
So, anybody could become.
Only thing is,
you have to learn to work the system.
Alan Kasujja: That you need to do,
that you need to do.
Sadhguru: And the goddamn system is too convoluted
in so many ways.
Because we must understand,
even if for hundred years we’re practicing democracy,
it is new.
In human mind,
it is still new.
We somewhere
Most people, I am telling you,
most people in the world are still looking up to somebody like a king.
Because
democracy is a functional reality
only when each individual is having a considered vote.
But in most countries,
it is a committed vote already.
Based on religion,
caste,
creed,
tribes,
it’s a committed vote.
Once it’s a committed vote,
it is feudalism in the guise of democracy.
It is not just in, you know,
Asian countries or African countries.
For example, if you go to America,
people say,
“My grandfather was a Republican,
my father was a Republican,
I am a Republican.”
I’m saying it’s a committed vote,
there is no consideration.
Otherwise, how could (Laughter/Applause)…?
Alan Kasujja: How...
How do you describe a good leader?
Do you know
As a matter of fact, I’d like you to do that
with an example,
of a leader who you consider as a good one
and describe the traits,
the elements that make him a good leader.
Sadhguru: See, a leader in a democratic society means
because his powers are limited
and his duration...
Alan Kasujja: Did you say his powers are limited?
Sadhguru: ye’s... They’re limited.
It is not like being a king or a dictator,
where he can do what he wants.
Even if he’s well-intentioned,
his powers are limited
because you have to convince
I don’t know how many Members of Parliaments and stuff you have here.
In India, for example,
you have to convince these five-hundred-and-forty-two people
– oh my god (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: Uganda it’s about four-hundred-and-eighty.
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughter)! You’re getting there (Laughter).
So, by the time you convince these five-hundred people
to think in one direction,
five years are over (Laughter/Applause).
So, democracy is a limited amount of power
and you have to convince everybody.
You should be able to inspire the population
to rise above their personal needs
and work for the national need,
which is not simple.
It’s a very complex process.
And in a democratic process,
for a leader to come to that place,
the very process of democracy is such,
it’s an obligatory process.
By the time he reaches there
he or she reaches there,
they are so super obligated to various...
you know,
people who supported them,
when they come there,
they are supposed to take care of all these people.
That’s what is called corruption by other people.
They’re just paying back (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: Is corruption a bad thing?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: Is corruption a bad thing?
Sadhguru: Corruption essentially means,
for me,
that your self-interest has risen above the larger interest,
for which you...
Alan Kasujja: That’s what most politicians do.
Their self-interest rises above the interest of the whole.
Sadhguru: I think that would be a very unfair judgment
on all politicians.
It is...
It’s not a good thing to say.
I know a whole lot of them are like that,
but not all, fortunately (Applause).
Fortunately, not all.
Alan Kasujja: Okay,
I’ll accept that but...
So corruption
Some say it’s a system of rule,
others say it’s an accelerator,
others say it’s not a bad thing,
it’s redistribution of wealth.
What do you think it is (Sadhguru laughs)?
Sadhguru: There are other ways to redistribute wealth
but what has happened is...
Let me talk about corruption in India because
I don’t know what variety you have here.
Alan Kasujja: I believe it’s the same out here (Laughter).
Sadhguru: What has happened in India is,
we inherited a whole bunch of laws from the British.
And they were all so ambiguously made,
probably by intent.
When I look at many of those things,
these are intentionally ambiguous,
so that if I want to pick you up,
I can anyway pick you up
for some reason or no reason.
Because the law is so ambiguous,
whichever way you walk on the street,
you’re committing a crime (Laughter),
okay?
It’s designed in such a way,
if I want to fix you,
there is some law.
Because you’re not doing anything, that’s a crime,
you’re doing something, that’s a crime.
Some where there is some law
for every citizen is committing some crime...
Alan Kasujja: I told you it’s the same like Uganda.
It’s the same here (Laughter).
Sadhguru: So the laws are so ambiguous (Laughs),
particularly… I’m... I’ve been talking to the lawmakers
about the business laws.
The laws are so ambiguous,
without corrupt people, business won’t happen.
If you stop all the corruption tomorrow morning in India,
half the business will stop or more will stop
because these corrupt people are facilitating things unfortunately.
Because the laws are ambiguous,
nobody understands.
Alan Kasujja: So...
Sadhguru: I meet the topmost corporate lawyer in India
and I was discussing something with him
and I asked him,
“Do you really understand this law?”
He said, “Sadhguru, no.”
Alan Kasujja: You know, that is like Uganda.
Sadhguru: He said, “Don’t tell anybody but I don...
I have no clue (Laughter).
All I know is,
my client comes, he tells me what he wants,
I will argue for that powerfully in the court.
That’s all.”
Alan Kasujja: I’ll tell you how it works in Uganda.
You call them up at night
and you talk to them individually
and you address the individual needs.
And one way of doing it could be to help them in a project
that they’re working on or
to pay off a loan to Crane Bank (Referring to the largest locally owned commercial bank in Uganda) (Laughter) or...
Or you know,
that... I’m sure that’s the same thing that happens in India,
isn’t it?
But the key question is,
is it a bad thing?
Sadhguru: That’s what I’m saying.
If you...
If we want to remove corruption
Now they’re talking about
bribe-givers and bribe-takers
both should go to prison,
so...
Alan Kasujja: Who’ll be left?
Sadhguru: I... I said ninety percent of the people will be in the prison (Laughter)
because almost everybody has paid at some point.
Who’s not paid?
Everybody has paid.
So,
this corruption as a (an?) industry –
I’m calling it an industry
because it’s pretty well organized
and well-oiled (Laughter) –
this corruption as an industry has thrived
because nations have not invested enough
in taking away the ambiguity in law.
Clearly, everybody knows where they stand.
Now, if I’m doing my business
and I know my law properly,
you come and ask for money,
I’m not going to pay you.
Now you come,
I don’t know what kind of laws you got.
I’m doing my business, I’m doing my best (Laughs)
but you come and if I don’t pay you,
I don’t know whether you’re going to just fine me
or handcuff me and take me,
I don’t really know.
Alan Kasujja: We could talk about politics or corruption all day
but I’m very keen to talk about health.
We are, like you said earlier,
at a place where technology is extremely advanced
and we’re very concerned about trying to stick around a little longer.
How do you maximize
How do you make sure that your lifestyle is healthy?
It sounds like an innocuous question,
which can be answered by a doctor,
but from your point of view?
Sadhguru: No, lot of doctors are not healthy.
Alan Kasujja: Lots of doctors are not healthy (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: They’re not.
Alan Kasujja: Yeah.
So in that context,
with that in mind,
health,
good health,
how do you achieve that?
Sadhguru: See, there’re many ways to look at this,
one fundamental way
the most fundamental way in which yoga looks at health is like this.
This body as a composition of things is made up like this –
it is seventy-two percent water,
twelve percent earth,
six percent air,
four percent fire,
remaining is space,
akash it’s called.
Now, if you manage one element,
that is water,
seventy-two percent of your health and well-being is taken care of.
There are two kinds of health issues,
one is infectious,
another is chronic.
Infectious means
it’s an invasion from an external organism,
which... for which you need a doctor.
If you get an infection,
you need chemical warfare.
But seventy percent of the ailments on the planet are self-help.
That is,
they grow their own pet project within themselves
because they’ve never paid attention to
how the body functions.
What is the nature of my existence,
no attention has been paid.
They’re living by accident,
so their being healthy or unhealthy also is by accident.
When we say health,
it is just that medically if you...
if someone says you have no ailment,
it does not mean you’re healthy.
When you wake up in the morning,
are you feeling alive and bouncy or not?
It is a certain sense of wholeness.
The word health comes from the word whole.
You must have a certain sense of wholeness
of body, mind, energy and the fundamental nature of your existence.
If all these things are in alignment,
now when you wake up in the morning,
you feel like you’re just born.
If this happens to you,
that means you’re healthy.
You may not be medically certified healthy
unhealthy
but still you may not be healthy,
because aaaa (Gestures)...
This’s not health.
Health means there is a certain sense of wholeness,
all ingredients have fallen together properly
and it’s alive.
If this has to happen,
one thing is
there is a most fundamental process in the yogic system called as bhuta shuddhi,
that is you start taking charge of the elements within the system.
If you control the elements in the system,
if you master the elements in the system,
health is not even an issue.
I can show you thousands of people,
who walked out of their chronic ailments without any treatment.
We don’t give them any treatment.
Just align your system in a certain way,
this (Referring to oneself) settles.
Another way of looking at health is
question of alignment.
Every physical object in the universe,
including your body,
has a certain geometry to it.
All physicality has a geometry to it.
If the geometry arrives at a certain state of perfection,
everything functions smoothly.
If the geometry is little disaligned,
everything becomes frictious.
So what people are learning in the form of physical forms of yoga is not exercise,
it is not (Laughs) stretching,
it is not about having abs (Few laugh).
It is about understanding
the geometry of your existence.
Today there is a theory in the scientific community,
which is called as the constructional theory.
What they’re trying to say is,
the design
the fundamental design of the atom and the cosmos
is essentially same.
We’ve been saying this for thousands of years –
anda pindanda, you know?
Both are same.
Because the way the ameba is made
and the way you are made,
essentially the design is same.
Complexity and sophistication has multiplied many times over
but fundamentally it is the same design.
If it’s the same design,
getting the geometry of your body right
in alignment with the larger geometry is important.
If you get this geometry,
then suddenly you find everything is happening smoothly within you,
everything is in alignment,
there is no friction.
The functioning of any machine,
the efficiency of any machine
is just a question of how friction-free it is.
If there is friction, the machine is inefficient.
If there is no friction, it is functioning well,
it’ll last longer,
it is a joy to have that machine.
Otherwise, it’s a misery to have that machine.
Alan Kasujja: That’s a very interesting point
and now coming to one of my final sessions
Does anybody have any questions at all?
If you do, please put your hands up
because I’d like to identify you.
There are a few questions,
there are a few hands going up at this point.
But right now, I want to talk about love,
I want to talk about marriage, I want to talk about family.
Sadhguru: You decide which one – love, or marriage or family (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: Well, that’s interesting.
That’s very interesting because
that was again the context in which I was looking at it.
Marriage and love, not importantly
not necessarily tied together?
Sadhguru: See, love...
love is something that happens within you.
Marriage is something that you do in the society, with somebody.
They’re two different things,
I’m saying. There may be love in your marriage
but there cannot be marriage in your love (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: That’s actually true.
Sadhguru: When we say love,
we are always thinking love means with somebody.
I love this person,
I love that person,
I love that person –
no.
I want you to look at this carefully.
Love is something that happens within you.
When your emotion comes to a certain sweetness,
then you say, “I’m in love.”
That...
With whom are you in love?
You are just using the other person as a key
to open up a certain dimension within you.
Alan Kasujja: I always thought that actually (Laughter).
Sadhguru: But what I’m telling you right now is,
why are you using a key
when there is no lock (Laughter)?
So, the choice is just this,
all the things which are most significant for you in your life –
you being peaceful,
joyful,
loving,
blissful,
these are important for you?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: These things, would you want them to be on push-start or self-start?
You know, in fifties,
if you had...
if you bought a car, along with that you need two people –
morning push-start (Laughter).
Early sixties, crank start, one person would do.
Now everything is on self-start.
So, things that truly matter to you in your life –
your joy,
your peacefulness,
your love,
your blissfulness,
everything about you
that is beautiful about you,
would you want to put it on self-start or push-start?
Self-start.
So if you are loving,
this is not about anybody.
If somebody is here, you can express,
nobody is here, you can sit here lovingly (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: I want you to watch what I’m about to do right now, Sadhguru (Sadhguru laughs).
How many Indian Ugandans are in here today?
Indian Ugandans,
put up your hands please.
Sadhguru: That’s all?
Alan Kasujja: Indian Ugandans? Okay,
how many black Ugandans are here,
African Ugandans?
Sadhguru: Hey, I knew you ____ (Unclear) (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: Yeah, yeah. Okay, how many.
Can we just see the Indian Ugandans again?
I think that they are more than those hands that
I saw up... go up. Right.
So how many of the Indian Ugandans
have been in a relationship with an African Ugandan (Laughter/Applause)?
Sadhguru: Hey, this is not a confession (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: Can I see a show of hands?
There is one here.
Sadhguru: No, no, the thing...
the thing about Indians is,
they will never confess such things in public (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: Okay.
In that se.. In that case,
then let me rephrase my question (Laughter).
How many Indian Ugandans
here know an Indian Ugandan
that has been in some sort (Laughter) of relationship with an African Ugandan?
Okay,
so there’re more hands going up now.
How many black Ugandans or African Ugandans have been in a relationship
with an Indian Ugandan?
Sadhguru: They’re such a small percentage, 0.01 percent.
Where do you find an Indian and fall in love?
Alan Kasujja: You see, my point is Sadhguru,
and I need to report to you this you know,
I need to report this to you.
Indians just don’t let us near their daughters (Laughter/Applause).
Sadhguru: That is not just for Ugandans,
they won’t let even Indians get close to their daughters (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: And in many ways,
I think this is part of the problem,
the fact that we live in a... in a country that is multicultural in many ways,
it’s cosmopolitan,
but that element of social integration doesn’t take place.
Sadhguru: Social integration need not mean
sexual integration.
Alan Kasujja: Whoa (Laughter/Applause)!
Sadhguru: Now, first of all,
let me define that word relationship.
Why is relationship always of the body?
So, probably
for most Indians and I’m true...
I’m sure it’s true for many Ugandans.
Alan Kasujja: You’re giving them an excuse, Sadhguru (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: You can tell me who you’re aiming at,
then I could (Laughter/Applause)
Alan Kasujja: Okay.
Sadhguru: We... Let’s redefine the word relationship.
Unfortunately, everybody has picked on the word relationship
as it is said in the American B-grade movies,
okay?
A relationship is of many kinds.
We hold various kinds of relationship with people
and maybe one relationship is of the body,
rest may have nothing to do with the body.
But we have many intimate and close relationships with people,
where our bodies are not involved.
Alan Kasujja: So we can be friends but I can’t marry your daughter?
Sadhguru: You can maybe marry if you pass the test (Laughter),
but you want to just take her for two days,
that’s not allowed (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: But my... my... my bigger point is, and...
and I beg to belabor this because
I think it’s very important.
I think... I wonder – and please correct me if I’m wrong –
if for example,
the Indian community in Uganda has done enough
to integrate into the greater part...
into Uganda and if...
because don’t you think surely,
where I come from, when you get married, you...
you’re bringing one another family,
you become a little more cohesive,
you become friendlier,
you become warmer, you create a better understanding
Isn’t this something
The cultural hybridity
that results,
isn’t this something that the country would benefit from?
Sadhguru: Yes, but the Indian problem is,
if they marry a Ugandan girl,
can she make dhokla (Laughter/Applause) tomorrow?
Alan Kasujja: She can learn (Sadhguru laughs).
Sadhguru: It’s not that simple (Laughter).
It’s too complicated.
No, it is not about...
I mean, if you’re looking at it as
are we in some state of discrimination,
I don’t think so.
I’m telling you, even in India,
even if they’re in India,
they’re… whole lot of them are Guajaratis,
they won’t marry Tamil person within the country.
They won’t marry a Bengali person.
They won’t marry an Andhra person.
Somewhere, if somebody falls in love,
it may happen.
But generally, they would like to marry in their own community,
in their own thing because
this is the way they have known life for thousands of years,
about preserving
talent and culture within that.
So why this was so is (Applause)
No
See, we’re...
we’re talking about times
when there were no universities to impart skills and knowledge.
So right now,
if there is a blacksmith,
he wants to marry only a blacksmith’s daughter,
not a goldsmith’s daughter
because she will be little dainty and fanciful,
she won’t last in the blacksmith’s house.
She won’t last.
So if this marriage has to be enduring,
because they’re looking at children,
till the children grow up,
the husband and wife should be together...
I mean, they’re thinking of a lifetime,
they’re not thinking of a few years.
So, they are very conscious about putting it through all kinds of screens
because they are thinking of marriage as a lifelong partnership,
not as a brief encounter.
Alan Kasujja: That doesn’t make it a good thing.
Sadhguru: I’m not saying it’s good or bad,
I’m just saying
why they may not be opening up their doors of marriage.
They don’t open their door...
Gujaratis will not open their doors of marriage to Tamil,
Tamil people no way will marry a Gujarati (Laughter).
Yes, they will not.
Maybe individual people,
out of interaction,
young people meet each other, it may happen,
but families will not do it.
Now things are changing a little bit
because it’s becoming difficult to find your own kind,
so people are doing something.
But it’ll still l... take a long time
because of many aspects to this.
It’s very difficult to explain because...
See, if I go
if I go in United States to somebody’s house,
I just smell the seasoning in the house
and I say, “You’re this community, isn’t it?”
They say, “Sadhguru, how do you know?”
I said, “The seasoning” (Laughs)
because in a particular community,
it smells in a particular way.
Another community, which just lives in the neighborhood,
they make seasoning in a different way.
And these people can’t stand that
and they cannot stand this.
Their tongues have been, you know, cultured
to like only this.
Am I saying is this good, is this bad?
This is not the way.
It is great that there are so many varieties of people
and they’ve distinctly maintained this for some time.
Today a time has come in the world,
where people have to integrate,
but it need not be made compulsory.
Let it happen at its own time (Applause).
Alan Kasujja: I just... I’ve stopped chasing her now (Laughter).
I’m going to ask you one of my last questions
and I’ll open up to the floor.
And if you have questions,
please put it up...
put up your hands and we’ll come to you.
You know what my favorite quote of yours is?
Sadhguru: I didn’t know you were... you...
I was your favorite (Laughs).
Now, I’m getting little...
Alan Kasujja: Yeah, you said it this morning actually.
Sadhguru: Because you said you stopped chasing her....
Alan Kasujja: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah...
Sadhguru: And now you’re saying I’m your favorite (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: By the way, you’re introducing a very interesting subject,
I shall ask you...
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no, no (Laughter)
Alan Kasujja: I shall not go there,
I shall not go there.
But you said
this morning that bullshit can get you there
but it won’t keep you there.
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Alan Kasujja: In the context of destiny,
in the context of trying to get to where we’re going,
how do we make sure that we’re doing the right thing
and then when we get there,
we’re going to stay there?
And I must explain that statement was made in a…following a story
and there was a story behind it,
it wasn’t just an independent statement.
Sadhguru: See, when we say destiny,
when we say life,
life is in the way you experience it,
not in the content of life.
It is in the context of life,
the way it happens within you.
You may... you may be sitting under a tree and blissed out,
you may be sitting in a palace and be depressed –
possible or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So the quality of life
and the destiny of your life
is the way it happens within you.
So what the world throws at you
is not always your choice.
It is a consequence of times in which we exist.
But whatever it throws at you,
what you make out of it is essentially you.
This is your destiny,
that it does not matter
what the world throws at you,
you know how to make it a good thing for yourself
and everybody around you.
This is taking charge of your destiny.
Destiny need not necessarily mean
all the physical situations that I dreamed of happened.
But my experience of life happens the way I want it –
this...
this means I am in charge of my destiny.
Well,
here a whole lot of people have been sharing their stories with me
that in this country, they prospered at one time
and they had to leave the country for eight-ten years
and then they came back.
That’s what I was telling them.
If somebody was asked to leave,
many people would hang from the trees,
not being able to take it.
But people went wherever they went
and they came back and recreated what they had,
a whole lot of them.
Maybe many of them lost it.
But what I’m saying is,
what they created physically is not the thing.
I must tell you a story.
You okay for a… for a mythological story?
Recently,
I was talking to a...
a large group of schoolchildren in a small town
in Andhra Pradesh,
which was a strange thing for me,
I was wondering whether they will understand English,
but they were all highly perked up (Laughs).
There were over 5000 children
and I was speaking to them.
Then one little girl stands up,
a fourteen-year-old girl.
Well, I’m sorry, I shouldn’t call her a little girl
because she doesn’t think
she’s little.
She stands up and asks,
“Sadhguru…” You know, Ram in Ayodhya,
his wife gets kidnapped from Sri Lanka… Where is he (Laughs)?
Alan Kasujja: Why are you pointing at
Sadhguru: He is Sri Lankan, he kidnapped (Laughter/Applause)
So this king’s wife was kidnapped
and then he walked all the way to Sri Lanka,
fought a battle, set fire to that entire city,
got his wife back, went back home,
it’s a big story.
So this little girl asks,
“Sadhguru, is it practical for a man to walk from Northern India to Sri Lanka?
Is this just a story
or is this real?”
Then I look at her and say,
“See, you are still a little girl.
One day, you will get a man of your own.
When you get this man, would...
Suppose you got lost somewhere,
would you want a man, who’ll walk all the way
or who will think,
“This is not practical”
and find solution in the neighborhood” (Laughter)?
Well, she knows she wants a man,
who’ll walk all the way.
That she knows.
Now if you...
You know, many of them are Ram worshippers,
they worship Ram.
If you look at Ram’s life,
it’s a continuous disaster (Laughter).
Yes.
He is the king.
Because of some political reasons,
he goes off into the jungle with his newly married wife.
She is a princess,
not trained to live in the jungle.
Seeing their plight,
their brother
his brother leaves his wife and children and travels with him
to support him in the jungle.
It’s a disaster.
I know you might have seen some movie,
where Sita doing (Gestures) that in the forest.
No.
You do one thing, just by yourself you go and live in the forest
for three months,
you will see what’ll happen to you.
It’s another game altogether.
So then she is there
and this guy comes and kidnaps her and takes her to Sri Lanka (Laughter).
And then he goes, fights a battle,
brings her back.
Again some political situation,
she is pregnant and at that time she...
he again takes her and leaves her in the jungle
all by herself.
And no sonogram (Laughter),
so he doesn’t know whether
it’s a boy, or a girl, or boys or girls.
She delivers twins,
two boys.
He doesn’t know.
Children grow up in the jungle.
Then unknowingly, he fights a battle with his own children.
He could have easily killed his own children.
It was very close.
Suppose unknowingly, you killed your own children,
do you need a bigger disaster in your life, I’m asking?
It’s the worst kind of disaster, isn’t it?
It almost happened.
Fortunately, he could not kill them.
But then she died in the jungle,
she...
He never, ever got to see her again.
This is not a success story
but they worship him.
Not because he is a big success on the outside.
No matter what happened,
he did not lose his balance.
He did not become resentful,
he did not become hateful,
he did not become angry,
he did not lose his composure.
No matter what life threw at him,
he maintained who he is.
So this is what we call as destiny.
His destiny is totally in his hands.
Life can do whatever
but he will do only what he has to do.
This is taking charge of your destiny (Applause).
Alan Kasujja: Thank you very much and right now I’d like to open up for...
Sadhguru: As a culture,
they all learnt to bow down to that quality,
not just success in the world.
He is a big success as a human being within himself.
For that, we’re bowing down (Applause).
Alan Kasujja: I’m opening up the floor now for questions.
I’m going to start with the gentleman over there.
Could you just put your hands up
if you’d like to ask questions?
Quite a few hands going up.
Let’s start with you, Sir.
If can stand up and introduce yourself.
Questioner (Andrew): My name is old man with a clan.
I am told that you are a guru of yoga.
I would like to know from you,
what animal is yoga.
Sadhguru: What?
Questioner (Andrew): What animal?
Sadhguru: Ani...
Questioner (Andrew): Animal.
Alan Kasujja: What is yoga?
Sadhguru: Okay.
Questioner (Andrew): And how can it be useful?
Why should an old man like me care about it?
And...
Sadhguru: No, I didn’t get that part of the...
What animal is...
Alan Kasujja: What is yoga basically...
Questioner (Andrew): Basically, I’m asking what is yoga?
Sadhguru: Oh, tch… Okay, all right.
Questioner (Andrew): And why should I care about it,
what is its value?
I am seriously ignorant about it.
The second question is,
what is the purpose of life,
how do I know that purpose,
how do I pursue it,
how to I find it and how do I live it?
Thank you (Applause).
Sadhguru: It seems to be a popular question, eh (Laughter)?
Alan Kasujja: Oh, his name is Andrew
not an old man though.
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: His name is Andrew
Sadhguru: His?
Alan Kasujja: Andrew.
Sadhguru: Andrew?
Alan Kasujja: Yes.
Sadhguru: Okay.
Andrew,
when...
When you ask what is yoga...
I’m sorry,
initially I missed that animal part (Laughs),
I get it.
What is this yoga?
First let me tell you,
this is the only practice on the planet,
which has lived for over 15,000 years,
without any papacy,
without any authority enforcing it on anybody.
Never in the history of this yogic culture
has it so happened,
somebody put a sword to your throat and said,
“You do yoga, otherwise you’re dead.”
No such thing ever happened.
Out of sheer efficacy,
because it works, it’s lived.
Today over two-billion people are doing some form of yoga.
What is it?
Many ways to look at it.
I would like to explore two different ways,
so that it brings some clarity to you.
One thing is,
you agree with me that
this human mechanism,
which you call as myself right now,
do you agree with me
that this is the most sophisticated technology on the planet?
Do you?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: I’m just asking you,
such a complex technology you have with you,
have you read the user’s manual (Laughter)?
So one dimension of yoga
is to explore the user’s manual,
which is written into this system (Referring to oneself),
so that you know
how to explore the full depth and dimension of
what this life is about.
If you explore the full depth and dimension of what this life (Referring to oneself) is about,
this second question,
“What is the purpose?” would be very easily answered.
Or in other words,
to make... simplify your question,
what you’re asking is,
“What is the nature of my existence?”
Because you are certain that you exist,
but you do not know the nature of your existence.
If you think one way, you become one way.
If you think another way, you become another way.
If you feel one way, you become one way.
You feel another way, tomorrow you fee
become another way
because what is human is not defined.
If you had come as any other creature
We know what is a earthworm,
we know what is a grass... grasshopper,
we know what is a tiger,
we know what is a lion,
but we don’t know what is a human being, isn’t it?
Being human beings,
you don’t know what is a human being
because nature has left a certain freedom for you.
With every other creature,
nature has drawn two lines
within which they have to live and die.
For the human being, there is only a bottom line,
there is no top line.
This means
there is a limitless possibility of exploration.
When we talk limitlessness,
definitely we must leave the physical behind, isn’t it?
Because physicality is the dimension of the limited,
physicality is always of boundaries.
When we utter the word limitless,
we must understand,
we want to transcend physical nature.
What is the purpose?
Suppose right now –
all of you, I’m asking you –
if you’re feeling really ecstatic,
would you ask
what is the purpose of life?
No.
It’s becoming little burdensome,
it’s a little drag,
when you get up in the morning,
“What the hell am I doing here?” kind of feeling,
now it comes up – what is the purpose?
Your idea of a purpose is you want a meaning.
I want you to understand,
meanings are a psychological problem.
You want to find a meaning.
There is no meaning anywhere in the existence
but meanings are important for your intellect.
If you keep your intellect aside,
there is no meaning to anything.
The existence is simply on.
What is the meaning of it?
There is no meaning.
This is just an intellectual pursuit.
Right now, because of the nature of your education,
the only dimension of intelligence
that you’re exploring is intellect.
Intellect is like a scalpel.
What are you give...
Whatever you give to your intellect,
it will dissect.
Right now, the very question that you’re asking
is to dissect.
What is the meaning of life?
What is the purpose of life means
we must dissect this life and see
why this life,
why am I here,
what should I do,
where should I go?
This is simply because
right now life is not being experienced.
Most human beings have become
a bundle of thoughts, emotions, ideas, opinions and prejudices.
These are all your making. This is not life.
This is your making.
Your psychological drama has overtaken the existential drama.
The creation,
such a magnificent creation,
but right now your psychological drama has overtaken
the creation itself.
Today, sun came up on time.
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So what? Tch, no (Laughs),
I must tell you this.
Some time ago, a year or little more than that,
I was to...
I was flying a helicopter in United States
and it was a good day weather-wise,
so we took off the doors and we’re flying a
open helicopter.
Well, every aviator knows,
for every 1000 feet that you go up, how much temperature and stuff.
But we just went up there, suddenly a cloud cover,
we hit a cold front,
the temperature dropped dramatically,
where you know,
even to hold the controls it became difficult,
so we decided to come down.
As we were coming down,
we were just discussing,
“Suppose tomorrow sun doesn’t come up, what happens?”
Oh, we thought maybe in three months,
this will happen,
six months, that will happen.
We came down and did a bit of research and we found,
if sun does not come up tomorrow morning,
in eighteen hours’ time,
almost everything that you know as life will be gone.
Except certain microbes deep in the earth,
almost everything will be frozen and gone.
So sun came up today morning,
I want to hear appropriate noises,
eh (Applause).
Yeah, it’s not a small thing.
But
Sun came up on time,
planet is spinning on time,
the entire galaxy is going on without any accidents,
everything in this cosmos today is going great.
But you have one little… nasty little thought
crawling in your head and it’s a bad day (Applause).
So,
when your intellect overtakes your experiential dimension,
then you will start thinking
what is the purpose of life
because life is a purpose onto itself,
if you experience this life in its fullness.
Right now,
your psychological drama is hijacking your life.
Most of the time, you’re thinking about life,
not living life.
I want you to go back to the greatest experience in your life,
whatever was the most exhilarating experience in your life,
suppose right now you were in that moment,
would you ask me what is the purpose of life?
The moment you ask this question,
immediately people will come up with this
God-given purposes that everybody has.
The moment some...
Whenever....
I have seen...
Whenever someone says, “God told me this”,
you can be very sure the...
a disaster is unfolding (Laughter).
Yes.
Whenever people spoke these words,
disasters were unfolding around them.
So, I want you to just look at this.
First of all,
this...
this convoluted idea has been taught to human beings
that existence is human-centric.
No,
this solar system is a speck in this cosmos.
Tomorrow morning,
if this speck vanishes,
nobody will miss it, believe me.
In this tiny speck of a solar system,
Planet Earth is a micro speck.
In that micro speck,
Kampala is a super micro speck.
In that, you are a big man (Laughter/Applause).
Now, this is...
this is not a simple problem.
Alan Kasujja: Right. And thank you very much for that.
Any more questions?
Any more questions?
Let me take the question from the lady here.
Can I just get a...
Sadhguru: We need to tell him the aba...
about the animal, the zoo of yoga.
Alan Kasujja: Yes, the zoo of yoga.
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Another dimension of yoga is this.
As you sit here, this is me, that’s you.
Distinctly clear, isn’t it?
Hmm?
No confusion between you and the person sitting next to you.
One hundred percent it’s clear,
this is me, this is somebody else.
But you’re inhaling and exhaling.
What you exhale, somebody may be inhaling,
what they exhale, you’re inhaling.
At least what you exhale, the trees are inhaling,
what the trees exhale, you’re inhaling.
If you stop this transaction
because you thought you’re too much of a solid state,
this is the end of you.
This is not just in respiration,
this is happening even in your subatomi...
subatomic particle level,
that there is a transaction going on with the entire existence.
I want you to just look at the reality we are in.
We are sitting on a planet,
round in shape,
that too on the equator,
we’re sitting like this (Gestures) (Laughter),
you know.
Suppose you got your school
your high school globe to your house
and sit on it,
you will be sitting like this (Gestures).
It’s an odd way to sit, you know, on the equator.
At least you must migrate to North Pole,
where you could sit firmly.
You’re sitting like this
and the damn planet is spinning,
and in the middle of nowhere, you don’t know where it begins,
where it ends,
here we’re sitting here and thinking what is the purpose of life (Laughter)?
Now, who you are right now...
It’s like this.
Let me give you an analogy.
As schoolchildren,
when you were children,
you might have blown soap bubbles.
Did you? Andrew? Andrew, Andrew?
Soap bubble?
Did you blow soap bubbles?
Alan Kasujja: Andrew.
Sadhguru: That’s okay. That’s okay.
So, when you blew a bubble,
this was your bubble, this was somebody’s bubble,
distinctly there.
But when it burst, what was the major content of this bubble,
the air within, where is my air and where is your air?
There is no such thing.
Even now, there is no such thing.
You are just imagining that this is me,
that is you.
Till you bury
Till you’re buried,
it looks like you won’t understand.
If you understand right now, your life will transform.
If you get it at that time, tch,
it’s a bit too late (Few applaud).
Alan Kasujja: Okay...
Sadhguru: Yoga means to obliterate the boundaries of your individuality.
As you sit here,
if you can obliterate the boundaries of your individuality
and begin to experience everything as myself,
or myself as everything...
Suppose you sat here in this hall
and experienced all the people in this hall
as you experience the ten fingers on your hand...
Because I want you to understand,
whatever the content of your body was not you some time ago,
it’s just the food that you’ve eaten.
It is the soil which has become food,
it is the food which has become flesh.
It was not you yesterday,
today it is you.
So what is not you, you’re able to make it yourself,
simply because you include it into the boundaries of your sensations.
So yoga means to be able to expand these boundaries in such a way
that if you sit here,
you experience the entire universe as yourself.
If you sit here and experience the entire universe as myself,
then we say you are in yoga,
not doing yoga.
Then you are a yogi.
So this is the purpose of yoga,
because not that this is something that we’ve invented,
this is the way life is happening.
Life is not happening as individual.
This is one big cosmic life.
You can blow your own soap bubble
and have a sense of individuality.
The magnanimity of creation is such,
though you are a puny little nothing,
it gives you a great sense of individuality
for a period of time.
So enjoy that
but don’t get lost in it
because that is not your nature.
Right now, you’ve blown a bubble,
enjoy the bubble.
But you must know,
this air is constantly in movement.
If it is not in movement,
it’ll suffocate.
So yoga means to consciously obliterate this.
As I was telling you,
whether it’s sexuality,
or love
or ambition,
or conquest
or yoga,
essentially the goal is same.
In some way, you want to make this (Referring to oneself) bigger than what it is.
But if it becomes bigger, it wants to become bigger.
So yoga means you learn to obliterate the individual boundaries,
so that you can experience the entire universe as myself.
This is not a philosophy,
this is not an ideology,
this is the way existence is happening.
If you experience life the way it is,
then you can handle life most efficiently.
If you do not experience it the way it is
but you have your own psychological drama,
which tells you something else,
then with the simplest things people are confused.
People don’t know how to handle their thought and emotion even today,
after fifty-sixty years of life,
simply because they have not seen life the way it is.
They are imagining things,
which are not there in their psychological space.
So yoga means to know reality,
to perceive reality just the way it is.
If you perceive everything just the way it is,
your ability to conduct life is greatly, greatly enhanced,
to a point where other people think it is superhuman.
So essentially,
it is about realizing the immensity of
what it means to be human (Applause).
Alan Kasujja: We still have a few minutes left.
There are very many hands going up at the moment.
About... Yeah, so let’s keep going.
Can I see the hands that are up again, please?
Lots of hands.
Mukesh, you’d like to ask a question?
Questioner (Mukesh): Pranam Guruji, this question which I’m going to ask is not... I’ve...
I’ve heard the answer before
but I would like this question to be answered by Sadhguru
for the benefit of lot of Ugandan friends and colleagues
and associates whom we’ve invited here.
Because during the time of passing invitations,
many of them point blank declined –
so this is… yoga is to do with Hinduism.
So Sadhguru,
if you can please explain,
is yoga specific to a belief system
or a particular religion?
Thank you (Sadhguru laughs).
Alan Kasujja: A friend of mine actually told me
when I invited him over that,
“I’m a follower of Christ, so I can’t come.”
So that’s an important question that Mukesh is asking.
Sadhguru: So, for the followers of Christ,
let me say something (Laughs).
He said many things
or today people say he said many things.
But some things we... we’re sure he said it,
rest of it we don’t know.
On the way, there are entrepreneurs, you know?
But the important thing about his life is,
he talked about taking people to another dimension of life
which he referred to as kingdom of god.
Everybody thought it’s up there.
Alan Kasujja: Isn’t it?
Sadhguru: People gathered –
let me say –
people gathered.
When enough people gathered,
he turned around and said,
“The kingdom of god is within you.”
Whoever says that, he is a yogi (Applause).
Alan Kasujja: Jesus Christ was a yogi?
Sadhguru: I am not saying anything.
I am saying whoever says the ultimate nature of the existence is within you,
he’s a yogi.
That’s what yoga means.
So, what he said,
what he did not say,
I’ve not made a study of it,
I do not know,
but people have been telling me this is what he said.
If he said this, he must be a yogi
because unless you’re in that experience of inclusiveness,
you wouldn’t say that.
He definitely did not read a yoga text,
he must have experienced. Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: I was going to say that. Yeah, maybe he didn’t read it.
Sadhguru: He didn’t... He def..
He did not read that.
It is from an inner experience that he’s saying it’s within you.
If he says it’s within you,
this means he is a yogi.
So what kind of a yogi he is?
Well, he’s Middle Eastern,
so he’s of a certain kind,
he speaks the language of the time and the area.
Whoever came anytime...
In India, thousands of yogis came.
The reason why thousands came is,
this land developed a certain discipline,
that if somebody talks about dimensions beyond our experience,
we should never persecute them.
This discipline they brought into their culture.
Because of this,
every generation produced
thousands of enlightened beings.
Everybody is saying their own thing in their own way,
but ultimately talking about the same reality.
But in this part of the world
or wherever he came,
he stood out
because generally persecution was the way.
Apart from organized religion,
if everything was...
anything else was said, he would be dead.
That’s the normal thing.
Well, it happened to him also,
anyway.
It happened to him also,
a horrible way of ending his life.
Even today I see,
when I go to certain countries,
I am not abusing anybody,
I’m just asking a few questions.
If I ask a few questions,
in some countries, they stand up and tell me (Laughs),
“You will leave this country headfirst” (Laughter) –
that means horizontal,
that’s what they mean (Laughter).
I tell them,
“Everywhere I go, I always go head first.
You also should learn this, head first” (Laughs).
Now, about this yoga being Hindu,
it’s like this.
This is a profound understanding of human mechanism.
If you say yoga is Hindu,
gravity must be Jewish (Laughter).
The word Hindu means this.
There is a Himalayan range in the northern part of India.
In the south there is an Indian Ocean.
This is called Himalaya,
this was called Indu Sagara.
Hindu means the land that lies between the Himalayan ranges and this Indian Ocean was called Hindu.
This culture prospered and flourished for over 5-6000 years,
undisturbed by invasions,
undisturbed by other wild tribes which are outside.
So people slowly developed reverence to these two geographical features
because they knew their well-being was mainly
because of these Himalayan ranges and the ocean,
which protected them.
So they called the land Hindu to start with.
Later on, they called themselves Hindu.
So anything that’s born in this land,
because it’s a geographical identity,
an earthworm born in that land is a Hindu earthworm (Laughter).
This is not a religious identity,
this is a geographical identity.
Like right now a lion born in Africa is called and African lion.
So why is an earthworm born in India not a Hindu earthworm (Alan Kasujja laughs)?
But somewhere along the way,
when external forces came,
they had a religion of their own,
they had a god of their own,
they had a book of their own.
We didn’t have any
because we were not believers at any time in history.
Even today,
India is not a land of believers,
it is a land of seekers.
The highest value is not god in India even today,
if you do not know (Applause).
The highest value is mukti,
which means liberation or freedom.
Freedom is the highest value.
God has never been the highest value.
We know the technologies of god-making (Laughter).
We made thirty-three-million gods and goddesses (Laughter/Applause)
because we understood how to create a form and energize it
and make it work in a particular way for us.
But never ever that culture propagated a god up there,
a book which tells you what to do.
Everything is a debate.
Even when people who were recognized godly,
when they came,
there were no commandments,
there were only debates,
endless debates.
Even today,
Indians are still debating (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: In the same vein therefore...
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: ...is there such a thing as an afterlife or is this it?
Sadhguru: You want to know what happens after death?
Alan Kasujja: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Some things you know best by experience (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: So you want me to die faster, then find out what happens (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: No, no, no (Laughs).
The thing is, everybody wants to know what happens after death,
but actually what they’re asking is,
“What is the nature of my existence?
I’m here right now,
but I know one day...
People who were here before me,
they died and pup they vanished,
what happened?
So what’ll happen to me?”
What you’re saying is,
“What is the nature of my existence?
Will my existence end with this body
or will something else happen?
Will I go to some place?
Will the accommodations be good there (Laughter)?
How is the climate?” (Laughs) –
all these things.
See, if you want to know the nature of your existence,
this is the best time to know, isn’t it?
You’re here, alive,
with an active intelligence.
This is the best time to explore.
Another dimension of yoga is this –
not by... not by dogma,
not by theory,
not by belief,
but by systems of exploration.
Is this...
Is this true that your body that you have right now,
you gathered it over a period of time?
Hello?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whatever you gather,
you can claim it is mine.
But if you say it’s me,
you kind of lost it, isn’t it?
Hello?
You understand what I’m saying?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: See, right now, I say,
“This glass is my glass.”
Then you will think,
“Oh, Sadhguru has some problem
but let’s listen some more.
Everybody says he’s wise.”
After some time,
I take this and I say,
“This is me.”
Then you will say, “Let’s go” (Laughter)
because this amounts to madness.
But right now, there is water here,
if I drink it, it does become a part of me, isn’t it?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: This is how you gathered whatever number of kilograms you have right now with you (Laughter).
Yes or no?
This entire body was gathered from outside.
The content of the mind and the content of the body,
you gathered from outside.
This is a heap of food,
this is a heap of impressions.
What you gather can be yours,
can never ever be you.
So there must be something beyond this body,
beyond this mind.
Don’t assume.
Why don’t you explore?
How can you live here without knowing the nature of your existence?
You want to know what happens after death?
Don’t you want to know right now
what is the nature of your existence?
You must know.
If you don’t know,
you will be eternally confused human being.
Alan Kasujja: Thank you. Any more questions, please?
Yes,
let’s have the lady here ask a question.
Anybody at the back?
Okay. And then I’ll come...
Let’s move to the back of the room next please.
Questioner: Pranam, Sadhguruji,
I’ve just got a question here.
Alan Kasujja: Okay, can we have the lady here first,
please?
Yes?
Questioner (Renu): Pranam Guruji,
good evening.
Questioner (Rochelle Bhatinda): Thank you so much.
Namaste Sadhguru.
Alan Kasujja: Right, I think there are very many microphones going around at the moment.
Sadhguru: Okay. The lady here
and then we’ll come to you.
Questioner (Rochelle Bhatinda): Okay.
Alan Kasujja: Yes. Please ask your question.
Questioner (Renu): Okay. Pranam Guruji, good evening Alan. My first question is to Alan.
Alan Kasujja: What’s your name?
Questioner (Renu): I’m Renu and I’m new to Uganda.
My question to you Alan is,
would you very briefly tell me what is ubuntu?
Alan Kasujja: Right. I wish I could tell you briefly but ____ (Unclear) to tell me briefly about it.
Ubuntu of course is the fact that
we are all human beings
and we’re all gathered to… we are all one basically.
Sadhguru: Oh, you’re talking about yoga (Laughter)!
What do you call that? Undu? Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: Ubuntu, ubuntu.
Sadhguru: That’s yoga.
Alan Kasujja: Yes (Laughter).
Sadhguru: But...
But the difference may be,
in yoga we have systems and methods
through which we can experience,
we can bring you to an experience of undu (ubuntu?),
the methodology (Laughs).
But right now, you may have a philosophy of oneness
but you don’t have a method.
The thing is to teach a scientific process through which
you can come to that state of what you call as...
Alan Kasujja: Ubuntu.
Questioner (Renu): Guruji, how ubuntu has been explained to me is –
essentially, I am who I am because of who we all are,
so I am a reflection of Alan and Alan is a reflection of me.
I don’t know if that is true or not.
Sadhguru: No, no, no.
Alan Kasujja: I would love to look that way.
Sadhguru: No, no, no, I wouldn’t take that seriously.
Alan Kasujja: I agree (Both laugh).
Questioner (Renu): So Guruji,
can we take it to Vasudev Kutumbakam somehow?
Sadhguru: No, no, no, no, no (Laughs).
Questioner (Renu): Between ubuntu and Vasudev Kutumbakam,
do you think there is any commonality?
Sadhguru: See, do... do not try to reduce everything into a slogan.
This is a dangerous process.
Questioner (Renu): Yes, but the interconnectedness of humans.
Alan Kasujja: Thank you very much.
Before you answer that question,
can I have the lady that stood up and then the gentleman, please?
I’d like to have as many female voices in ____ (Unclear)
and then... and then... Yeah,
what’s your name and what’s your question?
Questioner (Rochelle Bhatinda): Okay, so namaste Sadhguru,
my name is Rochelle Bhatinda and I’m a storyteller.
You talked about the body’s ability to heal itself
and I had this question in mind.
It’s about the kundalini.
Now, can you ignite the kundalini to heal the healthy body of diseases?
And would you encourage somebody with really complicated illnesses
like heart disease
to ignite their kundalini to heal themselves?
Thank you.
Alan Kasujja: Are you Ugandan (Laughter)?
Questioner (Rochelle Bhatinda): Yes, I’m Ugandan.
I’m of Ngo clan.
Alan Kasujja: She’s a Muganda,
she’s from my tribe (Laughter),
but what she just talked about,
I have no idea about (Laughter/Applause)
What did she just say, by the way (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: This is...
The thing is,
the Indian languages have an elaborate vocabulary
to describe different dimensions that function within you.
The English language has phenomenal vocabulary
to describe the outside
but when it comes to the inside,
it’s very poor.
But the Indian languages,
particularly Sanskrit,
she’s picked up one word from that.
It has an...
Alan Kasujja: So it actually exists?
Sadhguru: Hmm?
Alan Kasujja: The word exists?
Sadhguru: Yes, yes (Laughs).
So, kundalini means a certain...
Right now, I’m speaking,
this is kundalini,
the energy behind this is kundalini.
You are listening, that is also kundalini.
A dog is barking, that is also kundalini.
A flower is blossoming, that is also kundalini.
Or in other words,
that energy which makes everything happen in the physical creation
is called kundalini.
So what they’re right now referring to is,
there is an entire system called kundalini yoga
to maximize this energy.
Because generally,
in most human beings,
to eat, sleep, reproduce and die,
a miniscule of this energy is active means
it’s good enough.
If you raise this energy,
then what is happening is,
in the composition of elements,
you’re chi...
you’re trying to change the fundamental composition of how you’re made.
That is, you’re trying to increase
what is called as akash.
This means your perception will enhance
because only what you perceive, you know,
rest is just imagination.
Right now,
our modern education systems have surrendered to information.
After some time you will see,
information means nothing
because you seem to know everything
but you don’t know anything.
Right now, we know so much about health.
But they tell me,
the world’s food industry is 7.6 trillion dollars,
the world’s pharmaceutical industry is seven point two trillion dollars
They’re saying by the end of ninety
I mean, 2017,
the pharmaceutical industry will overtake the food industry.
That means we’ll be eating more medicine than food on this planet.
And we’re healthy (Laughs)!
We...
We know so much about health
but we don't know how to be healthy.
Like this,
because information only gives you a sense of knowing something
but you cannot really make it happen in life that way.
It is...
It is okay with material things.
But when it comes to life,
information doesn’t take you anywhere.
Probably your grandma... your grandmother lived with much more life sense
than with all the intellect and education that most people have today,
simply because there was life sense,
everything was by experience.
So kundalini, when we talk about it,
we are trying to raise the energy.
Now can it heal ailments and this?
We must understand this much,
this entire body was created from within, right?
Whatever you...
I hear you eat a lot of bananas,
but by eating all those bananas,
you didn’t go bananas, you became human, all right (Laughter)?
So, whatever you eat,
there is something inside,
which is capable of manufacturing this body.
When the very source of manufacturing this body is within you,
if there is a repair job to be done,
is it best to go to the manufacturer
or to the local tinker (Laughter)?
If you have access with the manufacturer,
you would go to the manufacturer.
If you’ve lost access, you will go to the local
tinker.
The... I saw they’re building a huge Toyota showroom
and a repair shop.
So, if you have access,
you will go to the Toyota showroom when you have a Toyota,
otherwise you’ll do...
go to the local guy who fixes everything with a hammer (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: And you know, that’s just one type of yoga, isn’t it?
How many types of yoga exist
and how do I know which one is right?
Sadhguru: On a certain day,
four people were walking in the forest.
One of them was a karma yogi,
another was a gnana yogi,
another was a bhakti yogi,
another was a kriya yogi.
What this means is,
if you employ your body or physical action to reach your ultimate nature,
we call this karma yoga,
yoga of action.
If you employ your intelligence to do the same,
we call this gnana yoga,
yoga of intelligence.
If you employ your emotion to do this,
we call this bhakti yoga,
yoga of devotion or emotion.
If you employ your energies to do that,
we call this kriya yoga,
yoga of transforming energies.
So these four men were walking together.
Usually, these four people will be
never found together
because they cannot get along,
because a man
The yoga of intelligence has a very sharp intellect.
Those who have a sharp intellect can’t stand devotional people.
Have you seen this?
Yes or no (Laughs)?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: They can’t stand devotional people who’re doing “Ram Ram” all the time.
They cannot stand them.
Alan Kasujja: Andrew ____ (Unclear) (Referring to a previous questioner) is one of them.
He can’t stand emotional people.
Sadhguru: Yes, he is for gnana yoga candidate (Laughs).
So these are the only four types of yoga you can do
because these are the only four instruments you have on your hands.
So these four people were walking,
suddenly a thunderstorm broke loose
and they started running looking for shelter.
The bhakti yogi,
the man of devotion said,
“In this direction, there’s and ancient temple,
let’s go there.”
Well, they trust him with the geography of temples,
so they ran there.
This is an ancient temple, where the walls have all collapsed,
just four columns and a roof
and there’s a deity in the center.
They all rushed into the temple –
not because of their love for god,
simply escaping the storm.
Then the storm became very severe,
started lashing from every direction.
There was no other place,
so they came closer and closer.
Then they just hugged the deity and sat down,
all four of them,
just to escape the rain,
not because they love god.
And suddenly god appeared. Tch,
in all their minds, the same question,
“Why now?
We did so many things, you did not come.
Now when we’re just escaping the rain, you turn up,
why now?”
So god said,
“At last you four idiots got together,
I’ve been waiting for this for a long time (Laughter/Applause).
So, yoga (Laughs)
you are not just body,
just mind,
just energy,
just emotion,
you are a combination of these things.
Unless they come together in the right way,
there is no yoga for you.
So, you are one kind of combination,
somebody else is another kind of combination,
accordingly it has to be mixed.
That is why a live guru is important
because he mix the right concoction for you (Applause).
Alan Kasujja: Thank you very much.
Let’s go to the back of the room, please.
Yeah,
whoever gets the microphone first.
Sadhguru: Maa,
you must take the microphone,
please.
Alan Kasujja: To the back of the room,
please,
the very back of the room.
Yes,
yes.
Questioner: Hi, hello, hi, I had a quick question about faith traditions.
I’m actually a former graduate student in religious studies
and one of the biggest challenges
I have is this dichotomy that exists in religious faith,
especially fervent religious faith in religions that are...
or rather in people who chose to believe in their religion in a certain way.
And what I mean by that is there is great beauty when you go to particular countries
and you go to a mosque
and there’s incredible adherence to faith
that can be inspiring.
And you can see that in all traditions
across all countries.
But often,
that faith is coupled with negative attitudes,
homophobia,
Islamophobia,
fear of the other.
And my question to you is
how do we see the beauty in religious faith
while also avoiding some of the problematic things
that happens within dogmatic belief?
Alan Kasujja: It’s a really tough one.
Sadhguru: No, it’s very simple.
Alan Kasujja: Is it?
Sadhguru: Yeah.
Alan Kasujja: Okay.
Sadhguru: See (Laughs), the thing is just this.
Right now, I’m going to...
This is just an experiment.
Is it okay?
Can I experiment with you?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: This is just a simple experiment.
How many of you believe in god?
All such people raise your hand.
Okay,
that’s good.
How many of you believe you have two hands,
all such people raise one hand (Laughter).
How many of you believe you have two hands?
Okay.
Do you believe you have two hands
or do you know you have two hands (Laughter)?
Hmm?
You know you have two hands, isn’t it?
If somebody starts an argument with you
and tries to prove to you,
you have no two hands,
and suppose their argument
becomes too overwhelming
and he’s about to prove to you that you have no hands –
one slap in the face (Laughter),
he will know that you got hands (Laughter).
So with hands, you know,
with god, you believe.
I’m... I’m not trying to take it somewhere else,
I just want you to understand,
belief essentially comes,
still because humanity has not become sincere enough to come to this –
“What I know, I know,
what I do not know, I do not know.”
Yes (Applause)?
Everything...
Everything that you do not know,
you must believe
because belief gives you confidence.
This is the biggest disaster on the planet –
confidence without clarity.
What you need is clarity about life,
not confidence.
If you cannot see...
Right now, I want to walk through you, all right?
But my vision is not clear,
but I’m a very confident man.
I’m going to walk through you
but I can’t see properly –
am I a disaster or no?
If I can’t see properly,
I must at least go gently,
“I cannot see properly, please help me through this.”
If you do not have clarity,
at least you must have hesitation
about what you’re doing.
You have no clarity
but you have confidence is a disaster.
Humanity has suffered immensely for this.
Maximum amount of bloodshed,
maximum amount of hatred,
things have happened like this.
I want you to know this –
people may be projecting it this way
that the fight in the world is between good and bad.
Like you also tried to describe,
there’s a good part, there’s a bad part.
There is...
The fight is not between good and evil,
the fight is always between one man’s belief and another man’s belief (Applause).
Why is it...
Why is it we cannot come to a place
that we can admit
what I do not know as I do not know?
What is the problem?
You will have a much more sincere, straighter world.
Once you realize, “I do not know”,
the longing to know,
the seeking to know cannot be put down.
It is the nature of human intelligence –
if you do not know something,
you will want to know it.
Now we’re talking about...
See, you’re not talking about god,
you are not talking about heaven,
you are always talking about the nature of your existence, isn’t it?
Who the hell are you?
How did you happen?
This is the question.
Because you have no answers,
you’re inventing all kinds of things and believing it.
It may give you confidence,
it may bring you together with people,
you may sing,
you may dance
but you will also fight
because it is invariably bound to happen.
For the last 2-3000 years, you have seen how many wars have happened
because you believe one thing,
somebody believes something else.
I think it’s time humanity matures into this level of sincerity –
“What I know, I know,
what I do not know, I do not know.”
I want you to realize the immensity of “I do not know.”
If you see “I do not know”,
the longing to know,
the seeking to know
and the possibility of knowing becomes a reality,
otherwise you just believe something.
Can I tell you a small...
Can I tell them a small joke, Alan?
Alan Kasujja: Yeah.
Sadhguru: Because this is serious stuff, you know?
Alan Kasujja: Yeah, certainly. A small joke.
Sadhguru: Small joke.
There were two young boys,
very energetic.
When young boys are very energetic,
they are in constant trouble and they are.
The parents are very embarrassed
because the entire community is discussing their children.
But you know,
you know how to produce them
but you don’t know how to fix them, isn’t it (Laughter)?
So not knowing what to do,
they decided to take them to the local parish priest.
Because together they’re very strong,
they decided to take them separately.
So they took the younger boy first,
made him sit down in the priest’s office
and the parents left.
The priest walked in with his long robes
and he walked up and down.
You know,
it needs some drama,
otherwise these things don’t work (Few laugh).
So he walked up and down with a grave face.
The boy sat there and did the Ping-Pong act,
looking at the priest.
And this priest worked up a strategy,
“If I remind this boy that god is within him,
all his mischief will go.”
This is always the problem –
people who have never raised children,
they have fantastic ideas (Laughter).
Those who have raised children,
they know none of your goddamn ideas will work.
If you have the commitment
If you have the love and commitment,
you can wait out the problems.
But you don’t know how to fix the problems of your children, isn’t it (Laughs)?
So anyway, he came up with this strategy
and suddenly in mid-stride he stopped
and with a booming voice, he asked,
“Where is god?”
The boy looked bewildered.
He looked all over
because he must be somewhere in the priest’s office (Few laugh).
Then the priest saw he’s not getting the point.
Then he leaned on the table,
pointing at the little boy –
he’s giving him a clue,
god is within you –
“Where is god?”
The boy looked even more bewildered and looked under the table (Laughter).
Then the priest saw he’s not getting it.
So he walked around,
came close to the boy,
tapping on the little boy’s chest –
he’s giving a clear clue where god is –
tapping on his chest, he asked,
“Where is god?”
The boy got up and bolted out of the room.
He ran to the place, where his elder brother was,
and he said,
“We’re in real trouble.”
The elder brother asked,
“Why? What happened?”
He said,”
They have lost their god
and they think we did it” (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: I would like to take a few more questions
but we’re pressed for time,
so I’m going to try to wind up this conversation.
There’re so many hands still going on… going up.
I’m not sure what to do about that but...
Very many hands going up.
How much more time do I have?
Five minutes.
Okay,
we shall find a way of addressing all those questions at some point
but Sadhguru, let’s just wind down our conversation.
I’ve always wanted to ask you,
what’s with the beard?
Where did that come from?
Sadhguru: I’m sorry?
Alan Kasujja: What’s with the beard?
Sadhguru: You’re trying, I can see (Laughter).
I thought everybody knew about this.
This is something that grows on every man (Laughter).
Those who’ve removed it,
you must ask them,
“Why did you remove it” (Laughter)?
Why’re you asking me?
I did nothing about it (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: So, you just didn’t shave then (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: I just didn’t do anything about it
because I thought everything’s that’s given to me,
particularly around my head,
has a specific purpose (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: So I should grow my beard as well?
Sadhguru: You can try.
You’re trying, I can see (Laughter).
Alan Kasujja: Okay, that answers that.
So when you’re not trying, you’re quite...
Sadhguru: No, I can say something further on that.
Alan Kasujja: Yes.
Sadhguru: See, if you ask people why they have cut this,
left this, cut this, left that,
whatever,
all the distortions they have done (Few laugh),
why, if you ask them, they say,
“This is my fashion.”
All right?
So, it is not about fashion,
it is essentially wherever there is no pain in your body,
this is what you do.
Suppose there was no pain in your nose,
I’m sure in the name of fashion,
you would have stripped it in many different ways (Laughter).
Suppose there was no pain in your entire body,
I’m sure in the name of fashion,
you would pull out your intestines and swing it (Laughter).
If there was no pain,
you think people wouldn’t do it?
They would do all kinds of things.
Or in other words,
right now for most human beings,
it is not their sense which is preserving them,
it is their pain which is preserving them,
which is not a good way to live.
Alan Kasujja: That’s interesting (Applause).
And when you’re not offering this amazing...
this amazing wisdom and insight,
you’re riding motorbikes and riding fast cars.
What’s the fastest you’ve ever driven by the way?
Sadhguru: 342.
Alan Kasujja: 342? Kilometers an hour?
What were you trying to do,
kill yourself (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: No,
I...
I am not a foolish driver,
I’m a good driver (Laughter/Applause).
Alan Kasujja: And I know that...
that you love Indian classical music.
What other music do you listen to?
Do you listen to Lady Gaga,
hip-hop or these other things (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: There was a time when
rock and roll was everything.
My parents were steeped in classical music
but we hated it – the children,
me and my brother.
We would turn up rock and roll at full volume,
just so that this classical music by accident doesn’t enter my ear
and pollute me,
okay?
This’s how I was.
But it happened to me,
I became meditative over a period of time.
One day, I was on motorcycle –
it... it was in the Mysore University,
this was such a distinct and powerful experience for me –
and I was just riding.
I heard a powerful sound, you know,
some musical instrument that I can’t recognize.
It just...
It just gripped me like that and just drew me.
It’s not like I decided to go there.
I just went,
there’s an open air theater,
I just rode up to that place
and I parked there and I just looked.
And somebody was playing...
today I know it is a rudra veena.
It’s played in a very mild, slow way.
It’s not like dhang, dhang, dhang.
Alan Kasujja: Not like rock and roll.
Sadhguru: It’s like dhyaan, dhyaan, it’s going.
This sound just gripped me from within.
I just sat there on my motorcycle,
tears were coming out of my eyes,
just the sound was just destabilizing everything inside me.
It just shook me through and through.
From that day (Laughs),
suddenly my ear for classical music just evolved
into a big possibility.
And today, we are… one of the major music festivals in India happens
in the Yoga Center.
The rock and roll was important
because it moves your body and boom, boom, boom.
But once you become still within you,
suddenly this classical music...
When I say classical,
the Indian classical music is made in such a way,
if you listen to it carefully,
you will see your body will become still and erect.
You will see people unknowingly will sit like this.
I must tell you this.
This is about ten years ago,
when I f... when we first started this school, Home School.
I went there,
all these six, six-and-a-half-year-old children,
in the morning assembly, I went there to see them.
They are all like this (Gestures),
like this (Gestures),
like this (Gestures),
like this (Gestures).
I said why are these kids like broken tops?
And I thought what to do with them?
I just taught them the seven notes –
sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni, sa,
these are the seven notes.
Twelve minutes a day.
I’ll tell you, after a month-and-a-half I go there,
they’re all sitting like this (Gestures), unmoving.
That’s the impact it has on the system,
a proper arrangement of sounds
because sound is a reverberation.
Today modern science is proving to you,
everything in the existence is just a reverberation of energy.
Your idea of physicality is a myth.
If you get the sounds right,
you can make it coincide with who you are,
you can make it relate to the larger reality.
This is called as nadha yoga,
that means coming to a state of union within yourself just by using sounds.
So, the music has this.
When you’re young,
you like something that moves your body,
so it was rock and roll,
now you’re saying it’s hip-hop (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: And finally, when it’s all said and done,
how do you want to be remembered?
Sadhguru: I want everybody to be so blissed out
that they wouldn’t care to remember me (Few laugh).
Miserable people always remember.
Joyful people may have things in memory
but it’s not such a big thing.
So if people are always saying,
“Sadhguru, Sadhguru”,
this means they’re not still complete.
I want every one of them to be so complete
that I am unemployed
and they don’t have to remember me.
It’s a good thing (Laughs).
Alan Kasujja: Ladies and gentlemen, the Sadhguru,
a round of applause (Applause).
Thank you,
thank you very much (Laughter).
And I was going to say thank you so much
for being such an amazing audience
and apologies to the people whose questions I couldn’t take today.
And the Sadhguru will be conducting...
We’ll give you a little more information in a few moments
about how more you can interact with the Sadhguru.
Again, my name is Alan Kasujja
and thank you very much (Applause).
Sadhguru: Thank you (Laughs).
Once we
are born as human beings
somehow life got little complicated.
It would have been very simple
if we came here like any other creatures on the planet,
stomach full
everything is fine.
When we were hungry
we also believed that
“Once we take care of our survival
everything is going to be fine.”
No?
Now once
we realize somehow survival process is not good enough
there seems to be a need to do something more
immediately a whole industry
which we call as religion and spirituality sprung up. (Laughs)
All kinds of people trying to tell you
what you need to do to fulfill your life
or how you can never fulfill your life
but you have to go to heaven.
This has taken on so many forms,
so many
and
the diversity is wonderful but
the deception is quite shameful.
In the name of religion,
in the name of
believing this or that
we have broken humanity into so many pieces
that we can never fix it;
it almost looks like we can't fix it.
No?
And
then came the spiritual leaders.
There have been some truly wonderful,
absolutely incredible masters of past and present
but at the same time
too many
of all kinds of
different levels of ignorance
and different levels of intention
has grown into it.
There is all kinds of deception in the world
but the religious and the spiritual kind
is the grossest kind unfortunately.
If somebody’s
if somebody dear to you died,
your neighbor who was always quarrelling with you,
even he will simply bow down and go,
on that day at least.
Hmm?
Yes or no?
A criminal who came to rob your house
sees your wife is dead,
even he will say okay.
A politician
who is quarrelling with his opposition all the time,
when somebody dies even he goes,
but the spiritual people they won't miss an opportunity. (Laughter)
Somebody is dead who is dear to someone
and that moment they want to use.
Even a common criminal wouldn’t do that.
Isn't it so?
Even he would
Somebody is dead in the house
I don’t think any, you know, like
any house which is in condolence was ever burgled. (Laughs)
Usually it doesn’t happen, you know,
even he avoids it.
So, it becomes extremely important
to present the spiritual process in its proper light
for what it really is.
On a certain day
a bull was grazing upon the field.
Chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp,
chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp -
grazing, grazing, grazing, grazing, grazing
went deep into the forest;
weeks of grazing on lush grass
became nice and fat.
A lion which was past its prime,
was having difficulty hunting the wild creatures
saw this nice fact bull
and stopped him,
pounced upon him, killed him, ate him up.
Stomach became full.
Then with great satisfaction,
like our friend,
roared. Laughter)
There were few hunters passing that way,
they heard the roar,
they tracked him down and shot him dead.
The moral of the story is
when you are so full of bull
you should not open your mouth. (Laughter)
But they are so full of bull
and not for a moment they’ll keep their mouth shut.
You know
I was
two years ago when I was at the Economic Forum
somebody was speaking about something;
actually they were talking about brick making.
You know this is my problem,
I am interested in everything. (Laughs)
there is nothing that never interested me
so
spiritual process is just this
a deeper involvement with life,
much deeper than people would ever imagine.
Not just living the surface,
living the core.
This is not some bull that you read in some book,
this is not some nonsense that you received from somewhere,
this is going to the very core of life
and you cannot go to the core of life
unless you are willing to pay attention to the detail of life.
Nothing in the existence will yield to you
unless you pay attention to it, isn't it?
Yes?
Women are all nodding;
men are not saying anything. (Laughter)
Women are all saying hmm… (Gestures)
Nothing ever yields to you unless you pay attention to it. Isn’t it so?
And nothing ever cannot yield to you
if you pay enough attention to it.
The creation and the Creator has to yield to you
if you pay substantial attention to it.
so
if you
are willing to pay substantial attention to something
everything will yield
I was just telling them,
you know,
you’ve heard of Andrew Carnegie?
Hmm?
Have you heard of Carnegie?
Carnegie in 20th century became one of the richest men in America
in a very short span of time,
in a single generation,
just himself.
So, when as a young man he is
got into business and his business started multiplying at a phenomenal pace.
He started making money at a pace that
America had not witnessed till then.
So, naturally the administration got suspicious
that he may be doing some criminal activity to make so much money.
They put his business through the scanner
and they couldn’t find anything wrong.
Then they set up an enquiry for him;
a group of congressmen were conducting this enquiry
and then they asked,
“We have looked through your business in every possible way
and we don’t find anything wrong.
So how is it that you make so much money?
What is this?”
So Carnegie said,
“See I can keep my mind focused on something for five minutes at a stretch;
five minutes I can keep my mind focused on something.
Can any one of you do it?”
They all said, “No.”
And they actually set up some experiments;
none of them could keep their mind focused more than a few seconds.
Then he said,
“You should not be running United States.” (Laughter)
Nothing yields
unless you pay enough attention
and there is nothing in the existence which cannot yield
if you pay enough attention to it.
So, spiritual process is just about
paying attention to life;
taking attention deeper and deeper
where not just the creation
the very source of creation becomes a living reality for you,
even the source of creation has to yield.
There are beautiful stories in India
about how
when a yogi or a rishi sits down and starts his penance
or his meditation or something,
God is just helpless,
he doesn’t want to yield but he cannot do anything,
he has to come.
There’re many stories like this.
This is just to tell you
if human consciousness is substantially focused
even the source of creation cannot deny it to you,
even that has to yield.
So, this is a choice we have
either to exist here just as flesh and bone,
as a piece of creation
or as the Creator himself;
this is the choice we have.
When you exercise this choice,
when you do not waste this choice,
when you actually exercise this choice
then we say you are on the spiritual path.
I cannot understand how anybody cannot be on the spiritual path
because this is everybody’s aspiration.
Everybody wants to be something more than what he is right now.
Isn't it so?
That something more happens he wants to be something more.
This is a spiritual path conducted in a foolish way.
If you conduct it the right way
then it produces results
otherwise you will die as an aspiration.
Most people die as an aspiration unfortunately.
Very few people die… as a realization.
An aspiration is good as a starting point
but an aspiration is not a good thing as an ending point.
Isn't it so?
No?
Yes?
An aspiration is a good thing as a starting point.
An aspiration is not a good thing at the closing point.
Closing point should be realization. (Laughs)
Beginning point is aspiration,
that’s okay.
TarunTahiliani: when we talk about being this great society
and granted we were colonized and all,
what is this great society or culture
when we are so willing and with such alacrity we embrace the West,
we embrace what our colonizers left behind.
We judge our own if they don’t match up to this.
When they don’t feel comfortable enough,
So, perhaps you can help me
resolve this constant confusion I have in terms of,
we as a culture why have we done this to ourselves?
Sadhguru: We need to understand the difference between conquest and colonization.
Conquest is to beat somebody down and sit on top of their heads.
Colonization is to convert people into your way,
so that they will serve you without thinking they are serving you.
So, some of the things,
which were the strengths of the nation were clearly mocked out by the British.
You must see the letters that Macaulay wrote to the parliament.
So, he said
“There are three things which make
India to be a place which is impossible to be conquered.
One thing is its education system,
another thing is its spiritual process,
another thing is its family and cultural strength.
If we don’t weaken these three things,
we will never conquer
wherever they went, they had absolute success, hundred percent success.
You go to Australia (Laughs), it is another England, okay?
The native cultures of those lands are only archival,
only in the museums they live.
In many parts of Africa, South America, North America, everywhere
they have absolute success.
The only place where they did not succeed
though you and me are speaking English language today –
they did not succeed entirely here,
because one thing is the spiritual process was so strong,
the ethos of spirituality,
the only way you could take away the Hindu way of life,
which was not a religion per se,
it was a certain a millionfold
a million doorway palace of spiritual process,
not one kind of process,
not one kind of belief.
The only way you could kill this was to kill every human being that lived in this country,
because there was no one papacy,
one focused place where all the knowledge is centered.
It’s just happening decentralized,
completely decentralized.
So, it’s because of this you still have some India left.
That’s the only reason.
Otherwise, in three hundred… two hundred and fifty to three hundred years’ time is a long enough time
to subjugate people and change everything about them.
It’s a matter of eight to nine… eight to ten generations of people.
Everything can be wiped out in ten generations.
The only and only place where they have not succeeded is India
though you became a little bit of a sahib.
TarunTahiliani: Too much sir, regretfully
Sadhguru: Oh!
That’s what every generation thinks
that their time is particularly challenging and testing time.
It’s the fancy of every generation;
it’s okay.`
Leaving that aside,
what role can a spiritual process play?
It is like this
if you want to do anything well,
suppose you want to drive well,
the more you know about your car,
the better you know your car,
the better you can drive it. Is that so?
Yes?
Is it so?
Then, this goes for you.
The better you know this one
the better you can deal with it,
the better you can conduct this to the process of life.
Just knowing the surface of it,
you are not going to do a great job.
If you just want to go to your office,
may be you just have to know where the steering wheel is
and where the two or three pedals are.
But if you want to put this on the Formula One track,
you better know everything,
all the dynamics that are functioning in the driving of a car,
isn’t it?
So if you want to be on the fast track,
you need to know much more about it.
If you somehow want to survive and go,
you don’t have to need… know much about it.
I believe when you call yourself an entrepreneur,
you’re planning to be on the fast track.
If you want to be on the fast track,
there should be nothing about this that you do not know.
You must know how to conduct this;
you must know how this will function at its optimum level.
When I say optimum
see right now,
if I close my eyes and stand here,
if somebody walks into this hall,
I will tell you what kind of person has walked into this hall.
You could do well with this in your office, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: In your business
somebody walks into your place,
if you just look at him,
you know what has walked into your office,
would it be a big thing?
‘Oh! What should I do?
What great yoga should I do?’
No, this is not the quality of a yogi.
Even your dog knows this.
Yes or no?
Your dog is sitting under the sofa.
Somebody came at the front door.
He knows who has come.
Yes or no?
Why is it that you’re missing out, I am asking?
You are missing out because you’ve messed up your mind
in such a way.
If you just learn to handle this properly,
you will see
human perception is such that
you don’t have to struggle with every little thing.
The stress and nonsense that you’re going through in life
is simply because this has not been sufficiently explored.
So spiritual process does not mean looking up or looking down
It means looking inward because
the more you know about it,
the more efficiently and more successfully
you can conduct this.
It doesn’t matter
what qualifications you have,
it doesn’t matter what accumulated information you have in your head.
Essentially your success is determined by
how this one is right now.
Yes or no?
And how to keep this one
in the highest possible level of alertness and balance,
exuberance and equanimity.
If you do not know this,
you’ll be only successful by chance
and even if you’re successful
anyway you’ll suffer it,
you will not enjoy it.
Whatever you wish to do
You must bring yourself to
moment of Joy
and
Clarity Within yourself
At that moment what you decide
even if you die you must go by that
Whenever your emotions to go up and down your mind says many things
That's not important
It says one thing today the one thing in the morning one thing in the evening
It says one thing today and another thing tomorrow
That has no consequence in a moment of clarity
But I'm saying joy because when you're happy you are not compulsive
when you're very happy
And clear at that time
If you look at things and [see] yes, this is what is more tangible for me?
Just do that. It doesn't matter if it feels like hell
It doesn't matter you go to hell for [10] years. It doesn't matter you [just] do that
Because that's where your well-being is
When you are in different states of compulsiveness if you make decisions as to which way to turn you will be endlessly lost
It is not about what you're doing. It is just that you're doing it in in an unwavering way
Every day you are off and on off and on that can happen
You just unwavering you'll become one-pointed. It doesn't matter what it is
If you want to be a butcher be a butcher in an unwavering way it will open up
Yes, not wavering for a moment what you have decided in a moment of clarity enjoy
Just ticking on to it without wavering a [little] bit
nobody can Deny [you]
Every day when your thoughts and emotions fly this way and that way you keep changing your mind changing your mind changing your mind
You will go in circles
endlessly in circles
because one who changes direction too often
Obviously is not interested in going anywhere, isn't it?
You know this is
The World is round
So which direction your voice doesn't matter as long?
as you go without Changing Direction
You will make the journey isn't it you will complete the [channels] isn't it if you change your direction
It'll put you into an endless
state of being lost always lost
so you
[want] to be there be there no problem?
You want to be here be here?
Don't go on changing your mind every day morning one way evening another way. You are a torture to yourself and everybody around you
one who is constantly changing their mind is the torture to the himself and to everyone around isn't it so
In the right now you're thinking tomorrow morning. I'm going to do my yoga
tomorrow morning and the Dawn
at five o'clock in the morning I
Hear it every day. I don't know how many of you hear it
The moment it goes down. Maybe we should beat a drum
Then your body says to hell with this yoga all I want to
It keeps changing the priorities keep changing and changing and changing
That is another way to live
where
The biggest [joys] that you have known in your life the greatest pleasures [that] you are known in your life
we look like
You know we look like ants pleasure
This being is capable of that
when it when it comes to body and mind
We're all differently capable no two bodies with equally capable
[not] [to] [mind] [directly] capable
but when it comes to this being
every being is equally capable of
containing the very existence within himself
Scientists are saying is ever expanded how to contain that's the whole beauty of it
That which is endless that which is eternal that which is boundless and that which is always expanding
That can be contained in this being
About that
No, two beings are differently capable every being is equally capable
it doesn't happen because
You keep changing Direction
Wherever you find a little niche which is comfortable you try to settle down there
this so-called
Getting civilize has become a huge detriment for spiritual
process
Not essentially but I would like to say this
because if if you were a nun as
You know nomad means what that [means] that means you [are] not mad
So who is not an omen one who is made?
One who is [mad] [set] [us] down?
One who is not mad moves on and on and on doesn't settle down anywhere?
the moment we stopped being nomadic
We got into a certain kind of madness of safety and security
whether it's physical
psychological or emotional you're always
Looking [for] that niche where we can settle down and sleep
and
Once you find an ish
And it gets too sweet and comfortable, and you don't have the courage to step out and once again make the journey
So if all you're [looking] for a picnic is a picnic then it's okay
You know it feels like that
When we if you want to try to climb the Seventh Hill?
You climb a certain distance?
Where your knees will be creaking and your breath will be
looking like an
You know a steam locomotive
Push push push. It's going then you look around and the Bamboo the
[beautiful] rocks the Bamboo around you when everything is so wonderful
The valleys are beautiful
What is the purpose?
Taking one more step. This is wonderful. This is it
Your mind tells you this is it
It's I'm not questioning the beauty of the class I
Am not questioning the pleasure of being there
But right now this argument has come
This new level of Logic has come in you
simply because
Your lungs are working like a steam engine
and your legs
And clicking like a nun oil Bullock-cart
so
new Logic will come
Do you see every time for different situations that you get into different States have comfort a discomfort you get into?
You develop a new logic
Have you noticed this with yourself like they say?
When you're a student everybody is a communist
The moment you come out of your education and get yourself a [job]. You become a socialist the
[moment] you get married you become a capitalist
According to you new situations different levels of comfort or discomfort
new levels of Logic will come
The world has come to a point where the mao is so become capitalist. That's it
That is it you know
so
It keeps happening
That's why in a certain moment of clarity [and] joy when you are there you look at something
What you see is your well-being?
You stick to that?
Tomorrow it looks like horror to you. It doesn't matter you stick to it. It feels like hell, you stick to it
That's well-being
If you keep shifting nothing happens
you
Sadhguru: So, the important thing is
this is not about rape;
this is about what kind of human beings are we raising.
Commerce has taken precedence over humanity.
Commerce is not about serving humanity;
humanity is serving commerce
it doesn’t matter what you can sell;
as long you can sell it, you’re doing great and you have to scale up. (Laughs)
So, there is a lot of looking at that humanity has to do.
One particular case of rape has brought the consciousness of the nation to a certain brink.
Using this, it’s time that
we look at the essentials of life.
Whether the crime or violence or forceful acts are committed against a woman or a man or a child,
it’s the same thing.
one is not different from the other.
If we approve one forceful act,
the other one will naturally evolve out of it.
This must start from the home situation.
If you can force feed your child,
you can be forcefully sexed also tomorrow.
I want you to understand this, this is how it starts.
If you think you can force feed your child
force is okay as long as you get to do what you want to do,
then everything else follows.
These are the offsprings of that.
We don’t want to attend or destroy the root;
we just want to prune the surface
because right now it hurts us - that is not a solution.
It’s
It is disheartening to see on the national news channel,
the discussion is
‘Should we castrate them or not?’
So, today if you castrate a rapist,
tomorrow cut off the hands of a thief,
cut off the head of somebody else who uses his brain… (Laughs)
there is… there is no limit to this.
This is not the solution.
Whatever sympathies you may have for the person who suffered,
the victim,
we must look for more profound solutions
more well thought out solutions;
not simply reacting -
reacting to one violence with another violence
is not going to breed a right kind of society.
Now is this in one society?
It is not.
It is just that in some societies,
the law enforcement may be little better.
Don’t think people are better,
no.
Law enforcement is little better
so it’s little more contained in certain societies,
little less contained in other societies.
One way -
yes, protection by law enforcement is needed.
No question about that
but still a transformation where law enforcement can be limited to a small percentage of criminals
is the society we want to live in.
We don’t want a big segment of population being curtailed by law enforcement alone.
‘If there is no policeman, they will do something else.’
It’s a dangerous situation to live in.
The statistics say that ninety-six percent of the rapes happen within the home.
Law enforcement never ever gets involved in this.
Ninety-six percent of the rapes happen within the four walls of the house.
So it never goes to the law.
So this cannot be contained by law.
Maybe the super-violent rape like what happened in Delhi
could be controlled to some extent by law enforcement
but not the other things.
The fundamental thing is that you want to possess,
humiliate, and subjugate another human being.
This is happening because of a certain level of inadequacy
a certain level of incompleteness within you
that only by possessing something,
you will feel little better.
Whether to fulfill this possession,
you go shopping or you go raping
it’s the same thing.
Something is inadequate;
you want to fulfill this by getting something.
This will find all kinds of ugly expressions.
Some of them you may think is harmless
but if you do this today and fulfill yourself -
tomorrow, you would like to step it up to something else and something else and something else.
It will not stop at one thing.
So the solution is not in just containing it.
The solution is in transformation of the individual human being
and nobody is willing to invest any time or life to make this happen.
Everybody wants an instant solution
go on the street protest for two days
and world will change.
World will not change.
If world has to change -
first thing is willing to invest time for my own transformation.
Only if you are willing to invest time for your transformation,
you are willing to invest time for other people’s transformation
because you understand the value of what it is.
If you are not willing to invest time upon your own transformation,
where is the question of doing anything for anybody’s transformation?
If you do not know the value of what it is experientially,
you will never invest.
You… (Laughs),
you see this every day;
maybe you don’t, I do.
Every day
well you have also seen
morning you get up;
you want to do your yoga
but everyday there’s something more important to do than yoga.
Yes?
Look back in your life.
What great things have you done which are so important?
There will be nothing great
but when you want to do your morning meditation,
you will see there is something more important to do.
This means,
you do not hold human transformation as a very crucial thing.
You think it’s an entertainment.
You think it’s a side thing to do.
It’s not the side thing to do.
It is the main thing to do;
transformation is the main thing to do.
If we do not transform individual people,
you just have to do with a world full of criminals.
Some will commit,
some will not commit.
Some will do it on the video game.
Some will have the courage to do it on the street.
Closet rapist or street rapist, not very different, isn't it?
Maybe for the victim, it’s different
but for the world that we live in, it’s not different.
You’re still living with such people, isn’t it?
So if this has to change,
we need to understand that
individual transformation is the most crucial thing.
If we are not willing to invest on that,
we just have to do with what we have and worse will come;
not that it’ll not come,
the worse will come.
Every time there is no law in a certain place,
every time a war happens;
what happens there?
Apart from the killing, what happens there is worse than the killing,
almost everywhere.
So, these are all the same people that you live with.
These are your sons and husbands, and brothers.
They are so nice
but if… if nobody is watching them,
they are something else.
Transformation means just this -
that who you are is not determined by other people’s opinions or other people’s presence.
You are like this
whether somebody is there or somebody is not there,
this is the way you are
this is transformation.
If this… in this direction humanity does not make an investment,
in this direction if every parent does not invest upon their children
to transform them into a more inclusive human being
Inclusion just means this
technically
to bring it down to a very technical level
inclusion, don’t teach it the name of love,
embracing the world, this and that;
inclusion just means this
that who you are is not limited to the absolute boundary of your physicality.
It is little more.
If it’s little more, the very way you walk on this planet,
the very way you breathe upon this planet,
the very way you exist in this planet will be different;
simply because your idea of who you are is beyond the boundaries of your physicality.
If this one thing happens to the human being,
suddenly he’s different in every possible way.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Nothing inspires me.
When I say nothing inspires me
uninspired I’m on twenty hours a day.
If I’m inspired, I’ll expire (Laughter).
It’s better I’m not inspired.
I’m bored with everything
but I do everything with absolute involvement and intensity.
Nobody has ever seen me doing anything slack,
but I am thoroughly bored
because it’s so silly and stupid.
There are other things I could do,
for which very few people are ready.
not many people are prepared for that level of perception.
Slowly we are increasing that number, it’s there.
But the rest of the activity is a dumbed down stuff of my life.
Ninety percent of my life is just dumbed down activity.
People think it’s great – it’s their problem.
In my experience it’s just dumbed down stuff.
If we do the real thing then the audience is too small.
So preparing the rest of the audience for the real thing,
preparation is taking decades of work (Laughs).
So I’m yet to do something really inspiring
(Sadhguru): Did you know that Shankaran Pillai had children?
He had children.
It's a sweet secret. (Laughter)
So one day,
Sunday,
Shankaran Pillai met his three sons
and told them,
‘You good for nothings, do something good in your life!
If you do good things, good things will come back to you.’
Is my accent good? (Laughter)
So
and these kids were something,
they said, ‘Father, what are good things?
How to do good things?’
Because such a thought had never occurred to them.
‘How can we do good thing?
What is a good thing?’ they asked.
He said, ‘At least help a old woman to cross a street;
at least that much good you do.’
So they left.
In the evening they came back.
So Shankaran Pillai asked,
‘Did you do any good thing?’
He asked the eldest son.
He said, ‘Yes father, as you said,
I helped a old woman to cross the street.’
‘That is wonderful my boy!’
He asked the second son.
He said, ‘I also helped a old woman to cross the street.’
He thought,
‘Both of them?
Maybe there were two old women. All right.’
He asked the third son.
He said, ‘I also helped an old woman to cross the street.’
He said, ‘All of you?
You found three old women to help them across the street today?’
They said, ‘Who is talking about three?
All of us together, we helped one.’
‘What?
It takes three young boys to help one old woman to cross the street?’
‘No, even we three were not enough,
you know our cousin Ramu, we also took his help.’
He asked, ‘What is that?
To help a old woman, three of you and Ramu also?’
Said, ‘Yes, you don't know how stubborn these old women can be. (Laughter)
She did not want to cross the street.
(Laughter)
We held her by the four limbs.’
So lot of good things are being done in the world.
A flower is not thinking of giving fragrance to you,
it has no such intention.
A tree is not thinking of giving oxygen to you,
no such intention in its mind.
The earthworm is not thinking of making the earth fertile for your crops,
no such intention in his head;
he has no head,
but whatever they do, they’re doing good things.
Yes or no?
Whatever they do, whichever way they live.
If they eat, they’re doing good things;
if they shit they are doing good things.
Isn't it so?
Because they’re just being themselves.
They are living according to their nature,
so they don't have to think of doing good things.
Only because human beings are not living according to their human nature,
they have to think up good things
and they think of these good things which are unbearable for lots of people.
Hmm?
So
this is not about you doing good things.
If your humanity flowers,
what is needed will anyway happen.
Like if a flower blossoms,
you don't have to tell it shoot the fragrance in the air;
it will anyway happen,
nobody can stop it.
Whether somebody is there to appreciate the flower
or nobody is there,
still the same fragrance will come.
When you come, more;
when you do not come, less – no such thing.
All the time on.
So
a couple of weeks ago
we put you on bhakti sadhana,
the way of devotion.
Devotion means just that, that's how you are;
you’re not acting it up when you see one particular person.
‘Sadhguru,’ like this.
Somebody else, ‘Hmph.’
This is an act; this is not going to work.
Just becoming like that.
Becoming like that,
not by training,
by digging little deeper.
If you dig deep enough into this,
that's how this is.
If you live on the surface,
you have to act like how somebody else says is a gooood way to be.
There is no good way to be.
There is a human way to be.
If you overflow with your humanity,
divinity has to descend, it has no choice.
If your humanity is constipated
and you’re trying to be gooood and gooood,
gooood is not going to work.
Gooood is not good.
Juhi Chawla: Sadhguruji then what is it,
okay so for all of us,
how do we live our days?
What is the best way to just go about it?
give us in clear simple,
simple sentences –
do this and you will be at least on the way to be blissful
or happy
or aware
or living in a nice conscious way (Laughs).
Sadhguru: If you
if you just observe,
if everybody makes a little effort,
everybody take a little time for this piece of life, okay.
Not for your family,
not for your career,
not for something else,
something else,
just for this piece of life
give it little time
because this is the most important piece of life in your life, isn’t it?
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Even if you’re in love with somebody (Laughs),
still this is the most important piece of life, isn’t it?
So pay some attention to this,
how does it happen,
why have you taken it for granted?
Believe me you’re not going to be here for …ever.
I’ll bless you with a long life
but you’re going to fall dead one day (Laughter).
Yes or no?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: So do not take this for granted.
If you wake up in the morning
tomorrow if you wake up in the morning (Laughter) -
no this is not my wish
but I want you to know
of all that people who go to bed tonight,
over a million people will not wake up tomorrow morning
and tomorrow
if you and me wake up tomorrow morning,
is it not a fantastic thing?
A million people did not wake up.
You woke up,
is it not a great thing?
Participants: Yes.
Sadhguru: Just look at the ceiling and smile,
you are still awake (Laughter &amp; Applause),
you’re still there.
and for many, many millions of people
somebody, who is dear to them did not wake up.
So just check those five, six people around you
they all woke up –
WOW! It’s a fantastic day (Laughter).
You woke up
and everybody who matters to you around you woke up,
is it not fantastic day?
Juhi Chawla: Yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t think so?
Juhi Chawla: Yes, yes.
Sadhguru: You don’t seem to think so
because the problem is just this
you are living with an idea that you are immortal.
When I say you’re immortal,
you’re not actually thinking you’re immortal
but you’re not conscious of your mortality.
If you’re not conscious of your mortality,
somewhere you think you’re immortal, isn’t it?
How many moments in a day are you conscious
that you’re mortal?
If you were conscious
would you have time to crib,
would you have time to fight with somebody,
would you have time to do some rubbish with your life?
If you knew
if you’re conscious that you are mortal
you would do nothing
other than what is absolutely needed for you
and everybody around you.
This one thing if you do
if you just remind yourself you
don’t think this is a negative thing,
death is not a negative thing;
it’s the only thing which has added value to your life.
If you’re here forever
you would be unbearable (Laughter).
Juhi Chawla: Yeah (Laughs), yes, yes.
Sadhguru: Isn’t it?
Aren’t we glad everybody dies one day (Laughs)?
If you just become conscious of this one thing
that always you’re conscious that “I’m mortal,”
you don’t have to think “I will die today.”
We don’t intend, we want to live as far as possible,
just you know “One day I will die.”
If you’re just conscious of this one thing
you will naturally become spiritual.
every day,
every moment if you remind yourself
this is a brief life
“I am mortal,
one day I will end,”
Just do this for two days and see
you will become something truly fantastic within yourself
just this is all
Juhi Chawla: That was… that was simply beautiful.
Saqdhguru: That's all that's needed
If you want to know
the value of life
Just know that it's a brief happening
Questioner: Sadhguru, I read in the "Mystic's musings"
that you clapped at the time of Dhyanalinga consecration and there was a crack on the linga.
Can you explain the significance behind that,
and is it sound or is it something else ?
Sadhguru: You want me to clap now? (Laughter)
Now, that is not because of the sound.
The power of sound that Panditji was saying is
in the modern science we’re trying to explain it off as resonance.
If the shruti is perfect on the two,
naturally the string will break.
As he was saying the bridge breaking up is a classic example in every text book you know,
two soldiers are walking and a bridge will
a bridge which can take tonnes of weight will collapse,
just because two men are walking in unison.
It’s a classic textbook example.
So just about anything can be cracked with sheer sound,
just by something like this (Snaps his finger).
If two people just do this, if it’s a perfect match,
you can bring the building down.
We don’t produce perfect musicians in the school (Laughs), okay?
They’ll bring down the building (Laughter),
because being in absolute unison can create a certain energy
where one plus one is no more two,
one plus one is a million.
So, classical music,
when two people sing
jugalbandi is never about two people singing together.
They’re always setting a this-thing,
because the musicians who crafted this music are aware
or if two musicians are absolutely perfect,
they could cause damage to the physical structure.
People may just attain,
their bodies may break, it is possible.
The whole process that you see in the Existence
is from non-creation to creation
from un-manifest to manifest,
but the other process is also happening.
Today, cosmologists have recognized
a whole galaxy will collapse into itself and become nothing.
It’ll become a black hole.
It’s nothingness,
and nothingness is recognized as the most powerful space in the Existence.
Today they’re beginning to call it dark energy and whatever else.
So, essentially sound is a certain kind of
it is the first step into creation from non-creation,
but yoga is about uniting that which is creation and that which is non-creation.
The word ‘yoga’ means to unite,
to uniting that which is creation.
Creation means a limited form,
it may be a planet,
it may be a solar system,
it may be a galaxy,
but still a limited form.
In our perspective it may be large,
we may think the universe is unlimited,
that’s our perspective.
An ant thinks you’re unlimited.
Our perspective of what is size is from the size of who we are,
you know, we are looking at something is large, something is small;
essentially any form is a limited space.
So, yoga means to unite that which is limited with that which is unlimited.
So what is a form,
to make it formless,
but at the same time we don’t want to lose our form
but we want to connect the limited with the unlimited.
Yoga means
The other word is to yoke, or to unite.
So we want to yoke or unite the limited with the unlimited.
We want to couple them in such a way
that we have the experience of both.
That is why we’re teaching you Shambhavi,
that means it’s a twilight zone,
where creation and non-creation,
both happening at the same time within you.
The process of creation is moving from un-manifest to manifest,
but another dimension which is even more important is
moving from manifest to un-manifest.
So this is a culture which recognized the significance and importance of that
and held that… held that as the foremost process in the Existence.
That is why we hold the destroyer as the Mahadeva.
Destroyer means he’s moving the manifest into un-manifest.
So, he’s held as the highest
because here we recognize that is the highest process.
Making the un-manifest into manifest is a limited process.
Making the manifest into un-manifest is the unlimited process.
So that is the reason, though Shiva is a destroyer,
he is held as a Mahadeva.
So cracking of the stone is not because of the sound.
I don’t even know if it made sound, it made some sound,
but it’s not this sound.
It’s a different process,
because if you… if any energy happens at a certain scale,
sound gets produced.
Have you seen the air planes sometimes,
the fighter jets are going and they
when they break the sound barrier,
boom… like a bomb it goes?
All that happened is an object moved faster then what it was,
within it… from a certain limit it crossed that limit of speed
and suddenly there’s an explosive sound;
nothing exploded.
See, nothing blew - all right, there’s no fire,
but there is sound.
When a jet crosses the sound limit,
there is no fire, there is no explosion happening,
nothing great happening in the engines of the jet,
but still you hear a boom, because an energy is created.
So the energy is the basis of the sound.
Sound is not the basis of the energy.
It’s the energy which is the basis of the sound;
because there is energy in this body I can make this sounds, isn’t it?
At the same time sound is the basis of energy on another level.
It is because of sound that energy has happened.
When there is no sound there is energy,
but it’s un-manifest, it is simply there.
So, today, modern nuclear science is explaining this in a certain way,
you know,
you can see virtual protons and virtual neutrons being created
if you just as much as add energy outside,
not connected to this chamber;
if you just play energy around,
you will see virtual protons get created.
That means creation is happening in a absolute vacuum space.
So in a non-Existence which we refer to as Shiva,
Existence is beginning to happen,
the first play of energy.
So we say this is Shakti. Energy is Shakti.
Once she begins to play, creation begins to happen.
The first form of creation is always the sound.
The… First there was word and it’s both ways.
See, we always try to understand everything logically,
logic always moves step-by-step.
Creation does not move step-by-step.
There’s no point trying to logically put it in on a note
a black board and say this, this, this, this is how creation happens,
it’s a silly way to go.
There’s only one way,
if you cave into yourself,
use whatever,
you use a… you use music, sound or a sledge hammer
use whatever the hell you want to use (Laughter),
but if you just cave in, then you know it.
(Questioner): Sadhguru, given the recent events happening around the world
(Sadhguru): What happening?
(Questioner): Given the recent events happening around the world,
why is it that people do choose to create
excessive violence thinking that it is a solution?
(Sadhguru): That’s what
who decides how much is enough?
Who decides what’s excess?
That’s the question.
I am not condoning violence
but
if you look at it in terms of
what’s been happening at least in the recorded history of human kind,
you will see that
twenty first century with the number of people that we are in terms of population,
we are in least amount of violence.
Even just look back in the twentieth century,
the two great wars
unbelievable, senseless violence, limitlessly happening.
Just in Europe alone
what happened between…from 1930s to 1945
I think they easily account for close to fifty million people,
but organized.
So
when it happens to us
when violence happens to us,
even the smallest violence
if somebody cut your little finger
it’s excessive, isn't it?
A bomb blast happened in Hyderabad,
only twenty people died day before yesterday
lot of people heaving a sigh of relief,
“Oh! Good only twenty.
In Bombay, two hundred died.”
But when it happens to us,
even if they pull one hair out of your body it’s excessive, isn't it?
So, let’s not discuss what is needed and what is excessive
because nobody can come to it.
We try to establish systems in the world
where we could use violence
verbally
and never pull anybody’s hair or head.
This we called a democratic process
where it’s a constant war of words.
Don’t be offended by the words
because if you take away the privilege of verbal war,
then it’ll translate into physical war.
So the violence in the world is
much less than ever before.
For the tools of violence that we have
which is the outcome of our scientific and technological capabilities –
if these tools are used
without the tongue-lashing capability in the parliaments
and the debates and Union… United Nations and everywhere –
Oh! We would destroy the world many times over.
That is not happening because modern societies have learnt
to tongue-lash each other.
We can say nasty things about each other.
These days, we do not even have the courage to say it in front of them,
so you blog!
Sitting in your home,
you can say the nastiest things possible.
It doesn’t matter,
it’s true,
untrue,
whether somebody’s going to read it or not,
it makes sense or it doesn’t make sense –
doesn’t matter;
simply say something.
This ability to articulate
whatever emotion you have within you,
we developed to a certain peak at one time.
Once again, this generation is
seems to be losing it
Now, I am not saying
“You must abuse each other.”
I am saying if this violence in you,
at least if you are articulate,
you would have spoken,
you would have written,
you would have debated about it –
you wouldn’t have exploded a bomb, isn't it?
You explode a bomb because
you don’t know how to make your point.
Because they do not know
how to make a verbal statement,
they’re trying to make a statement –
“Boom boom twenty people dead,
two hundred people injured”
a statement has been made.
A violent statement has been made.
“After all, we killed only twenty
we could have setup a truck bomb
instead of a car bomb or a bicycle bomb
and kill two thousand
we killed only twenty, you know” that is their argument.
so we should at least educate them
to be able to make a statement;
strong enough verbally
so that they don’t have to make a bicycle bomb
to make a statement.
(Sadhguru): Most people cannot meditate
unless they exhaust
the karma of activity within themselves.
The prarabdh
The prarabdh karma is like a coiled up spring,
it has to find its release.
If you don’t give it constructive work,
it will find release in all kinds of perversions.
It is like a coiled up spring, within this lifetime it has to release itself.
And considering all the risks that are there to physical life
you know, your physical form is never really safe,
any moment it can get crushed under something
considering that, prarabdh is anxious.
Prarabdh is always trying to find the quickest possible expression.
So when you have a tense spring sitting inside you,
you cannot
you sit there for half-an-hour then you want to do so many things.
Have you noticed this? You sit for meditation,
you sit like this, body tells you this is not the asana;
you sit like this, this is not the asana,
sit like this, this is not the asana.
Try any goddamn asana, it’ll tell you this is not it.
Have you tried?
Try to sit there for three, four hours then you will see what it is.
So this is simply because there is a coiled up stuff,
it has to find its way.
So the best way is to get into that kind of activity that it’ll wear you out,
by the time you go to bed if you put your head
even two inches before it touches the pillow you're dead,
really
So it's very important that
the karma or the energy that is allocated for activity
is expended as quickly as possible
so that stillness becomes a reality,
not just an idea
Sadhguru: On this planet
don’t think you are the most sophisticated being
on this planet.
Sadhguru: In your experience of life,
do you find all human beings
at the same level of evolution?
I’m asking you without prejudice?
With all due respect to every human being
do you find every human being at the same level of evolution?
Nobody has a tail though –
that they have passed
but there’re many who look more complete with a tail or horns
A whole lot of them would look more complete with a horn growing out of their head
because they’re always
Yes or no?
You drive on the street and see.
In this country it’s better
though the traffic is such a mess,
though driving in India is probably the most challenging thing.
But I see in other countries
the drivers driving their dream cars are on the edge
smallest thing,
they are in a rage.
Actually that is not so much here at least in South India.
In North India we know road rages,
in South it’s not like that.
We crash into each other,
we sit down and discuss and
maybe we’ll settle our son’s wedding
or daughter’s wedding right there
We believe this is our fate we crashed together
we met with a bang.
You don’t see much rage on southern Indian roads
but North India it happens
but in other countries I see the rage is so much
though traffic is far more disciplined,
very rarely anybody gets into your way
here every moment somebody is getting in your way.
Everybody, is you know trying to earn that seven years imprisonment
by attempting
they’re all testing their horoscope.
Their astrologer has told them you will live to eighty years,
so they’re testing it today
whether it’s true or not
It’s …it’s… A whole lot of things happening.
So in spite of all this horoscope testing,
you don’t find much rage.
So people who are in such a state of rage
if you gave them claws and horns,
it would be more suitable, isn’t it,
for their state of mind and emotion?
They actually want to claw somebody
but they don’t have the claws.
The evolutionary process should be
one day they’ll get the claws
So you don’t find all of them
the same level of evolution
because it’s a threshold that we have crossed,
that doesn’t mean that’s the end of it.
Because the significance of being human is just this
we are not doing anything very different
from what the other creatures are doing-
same damn things.
We are born, they are born just like that.
Their mother was… mothers delivered them,
our mothers delivered us.
Their mothers were more efficient with delivery,
our mothers struggled,
okay.
Yes
Because they delivered in hundreds
our mother to deliver one, she struggled so much.
They eat, we eat.
They sleep, we sleep.
They reproduce, we may reproduce.
They die, we die.
The only thing is we can do all this
we can conduct all these very simple aspects consciously.
So in a day from the moment - I’ll leave the sleep time for you,
that also needs to be considered
but we will leave that
from the moment you come awake till the moment you fall asleep,
how many moments and how many actions
and how many thoughts and how many emotions
or how much percentage of it
do you conduct consciously
this will determine the state of your evolution right now.
If you conduct it consciously
you will do it in a certain way.
If you’re going about compulsively
you will look like any other creature.
Yes.
You will look like just any other creature,
not any different,
once you do things compulsively.
Only when you conduct it consciously,
you seem to be on the peak of evolution on this planet,
not otherwise.
So you can gauge by yourself
I don’t to pass
I don’t want to pass a judgment on anybody
from the moment you come awake till the time you go asleep
fall asleep
how much percentage of time
are you conducting your body, your mind, your emotion,
your energy and your actions
consciously?
If you are less than one percent,
you know there’s a lot of work to do.
And I would tell you, the
if I have to speak frankly
more than ninety percent is less than one percent,
less than… well below one percent
more than ninety percent of the people.
Those ten percent who do little more than one percent,
suddenly they look like such graceful beings.
Just from tomorrow morning
you want to do it from tomorrow morning,
or now?
From this moment till you fall asleep,
just see how much of you can you conduct consciously,
all aspects of you -
your body, your actions, your mind, your thoughts, your emotions,
your energies, everything
to what extent can you conduct it consciously.
You see, if you conduct this consciously for five minutes,
by tomorrow morning people will bow down to you
without knowing why they’re doing.
So that’s evolution
and it’s something you can do.
If you just see “it’s me,” not something else
you will evolve
because once you become human
you have enough awareness and consciousness to evolve consciously.
When you were a monkey you did not decide
“I’ll become human being.”
Nature just pushed you on
but now you’re conscious enough to decide
“I want to evolve from where I am to whatever is possible.”
Just… Just try, just maintain
five minutes manage your life consciously today,
you will see tomorrow morning how you will be,
you’ll be shining, believe me

Sadhguru: The nature of life is such,
one is packed into the other,
other is packed into this and this and this and this.
It will not be realized
because you dissect it,
which is all you can do with your intellect.
Your intellect is a scalpel which is trying to dissect life.
Are you married?
If you want to really know your wife,
today you must take a scalpel and dissect her.
All the beauty of who she is,
if you want to know,
you must dissect her, isn’t it?
No.
It will become ugly.
It will not become beautiful.
That’s all you are trying to do.
You’re trying to know the Existence
using the scalpel of your intellect,
dissecting it.
It will only become ugly.
It will not become beautiful.
So intellect,
which is a simple silly tool
which is useful to handle material aspects of life,
you have raised it to heaven.
You are giving it the glory of heaven,
and think this is everything.
Whatever you see you want to cut it and see.
If you cut open things and see,
you will know one aspect of reality.
You will not the... know the whole of it.
If you open up this man,
you may see how the heart is doing dupu dupu
but you will not know this man.
You will not know the most vital aspect of who he is,
all the other details you will know.
So, with this how far will you go?
Physicality is all that you can cut, isn’t it?
Yes?
Physicality is the only thing you can cut.
Can you cut something which is not physical?
And all you got is a knife.
Okay, you also have a wife but...
I’m sure she doesn’t let it use it on her,
your intellect.
Does she?
She’ll immediately put an end to it,
because she knows this is not going to go anywhere.
There’s one thing about woman
the more intellectual you are,
the more trouble you have with women,
because they know this damn knife will not take you far.
It’s not by cutting that you will know.
It is by inclusion that you will know.
That your intellect cannot do,
it can only chop.
Chopping
vegetables are okay.
Life doesn’t work like that.
You can't chop life and know it.
You have to be... include it.
Only then you know it.
That’s a different dimension of intelligence
which intellect cannot do.
Devi Shetty: Sadhguru, I am constantly torn between my senior colleagues,
who are extremely skilled surgeons.
Sadhguru, the… on the heart there are some procedures,
which are done by very few people on this planet.
I’ll give an example -
I do an operation called pulmonary endarterectomy
that’s the blood clots from the leg goes to the lung arteries
and it clogs up all the arteries.
So twenty… twenty-five years ago there was no cure for this.
And once you are diagnosed,
you are destined to die within a year.
Today people who are on home oxygen for two years, three years
you do the operation they can go back to skydiving
or they can go to scuba diving.
That’s the transformative effect
but there are only fifty surgeons
less than fifty surgeons in this world who can operate.
And like this we have some of my colleagues
who are extremely gifted surgeons.
They are in their fifties now.
And some of them are constantly talking about retirement.
Especially one surgeon
he is a extremely gifted surgeon who can fix any damaged valve.
He is single,
he has no other commitments
every other day he talks about going to Banaras or somewhere
and retire and
I keep telling him that
God didn’t create him to retire and meditate.
He has to be fixing all these problems
So he gives me extension every six months Guruji.
So at the end of six months
the usual rigmarole starts,
he talks about retirement and everybody is depressed in the hospital.
So how do you deal with this kind of people?
Sadhguru: You must
you must give him a one year sabbatical with me
Yes,
because
the need or the idea of retirement enters anybody’s mind
because of the monotony of what they’re doing,
whatever it may be.
Somebody else may think it's a great thing
but in your experience somewhere it's becoming monotonous or stagnant.
Stagnation is one thing
that human intelligence and human system cannot take.
And most of the ailments are because of stagnation
stagnation of life.
They may be… they may be getting their you know once in three years promotion.
They may be making little more money.
All these things may be happening
but somewhere experientially there’s a stagnation,
which could be a major cause for many of the complex ailments
that people manufacture within their systems.
The more complex they get you try to create more talented surgeons.
I am saying we are manufacturing the problems,
we are trying to manufacture a solution.
I think as we offer solutions
people who have adl… already gotten into problems, they need solutions.
But it's very important
that we teach people how not to create these problems,
so that instead of fifty, you have to produce five thousand expert surgeons
to attend to all these people who are on self-help to illness.
So I would say a surgeon who is
who has a certain competence and who has worked through his life,
if he wants to explore something of his own nature,
that will be the greatest thing to do
because he is not a man without commitment
nor competence.
When competence and commitment is there,
you should not run him through the rig ram role (rigmarole?)
and destroy that possibility.
It’s important that he explores something of his own nature,
which will make him
We don't know what he’ll come up with.
You cannot even estimate what he may come up with.
I think a sabbatical is good.
He may come up with something that you have not thought possible.
Devi Shetty: I will… I will convey your message Sadhguru.
I am sure he is watching this program
VirenderSehwag: The critics or whatever somebody is criticizing me or
somebody is saying something to me gives
I’ll become a more determined to, you know,
score runs also.
But I’ll get very disturbed very quickly also.
So I know… what I should do at that time?
Should I reply to them?
Sadhguru: What is the most important part of your life is what’s happening within you, isn’t it?
Whether misery happens within you or joy happens within you,
it only comes from within you, isn’t it?
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: So, if joy is coming from within you,
why can’t you have it coming all the time?
If it was coming in the Delhi tap, I know it goes dry.
But if it’s coming from within you why can’t you keep it flowing?
Because we’ve not taken care of this (Gestures), isn’t it?
How you are, should never be determined by how somebody else is.
Once you allow that, you will remain a slave to somebody all your life
because they will decide whether you’ll be happy or unhappy. (Laughs)
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: The question is not about justice and injustice,
that's a different thing.
But, still whether there is justice or injustice,
the most unjust thing that you can do for yourself
and everybody around you,
especially other people who have such a big expectation of you, is that
you make yourself unhappy because unhappy means unpleasantness.
Unpleasant means
unpleasantness means inefficiency of life.
Inefficiency of life means you will get out. (Laughs)
In your profession, inefficiency of life means you will get out.
In somebody else’s profession, he will shoot a bad picture of me.
Somebody else will do something else.
But in your life, inefficiency means you’re back in the pavilion.
So, in your life it’s much more stark compared to other people’s lives,
because other people can explain.
other people can explain their inefficiency. (Laughs)
You cannot explain your inefficiency
we see it, and that’s all. (Laughs)
VirenderSehwag: And there are so many expectations from people, from family,
from friends that every time I walk on the field I have to score runs and
they want to see me on the field to score, you know hundreds.
So it’s… it’s difficult to perform at every time.
But, you know the expectation is there,
when I got out, so my son says you know,
“Papa why’re you getting out every time?
Why not you scoring hundred every time?”(Laughter)
So, you know I can understand he’s… he’s conscious
Sadhguru: He’s a child… (Laughter)
VirenderSehwag: He’s a child, he doesn’t know anything,
but still he is expecting from his father that
whenever he goes to the field, he can score runs at least fifty or hundred.
So, that expectation is… Is so much how
Sadhguru: You have more hundreds than fifties.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: You’re one of the few who has more hundreds than fifties.
VirenderSehwag: Ah! Yes.
When I got twenty-one centuries –
I got twenty fifties and twenty-one centuries,
and then later on I scored more fifties than hundreds
Sadhguru: See, once you enter the field,
once you go there and stand,
you should not be anybody’s husband,
anybody’s father,
anybody’s son,
not even an Indian –
you must just be a batsman.
You got a bat and the ball coming,
your business is just to hit the ball as it deserves.
If you stand there as an Indian,
one billion people will stand on your head.
It’s too much heavy weight to carry. (Laughs)
If you stand there as a father,
your children will sit on your shoulders,
very difficult to play the game with two children sitting on your shoulders.
VirenderSehwag: Yeah.
Sadhguru: You must leave all of them outside.
When you go there, you’re just a batsman
and that’s all your job is.
You must exclude all these things.
VirenderSehwag: But it’s… It’s very difficult for me to, you know
Sadhguru: For that, also
VirenderSehwag: Leave… Leave that thought there.
Sadhguru: For that, also, there are methods.
See, right now - I am constantly involved with people day in and day out,
twenty hours a day, I’m on and on and on with people seven days of the week.
But if I close my eyes, the world stops for me,
finished, it is.
The world doesn’t even exist for me if I close my eyes.
You must bring at least a little bit of this essence into your life
that there is… See, you were born alone?
VirenderSehwag: No.
Sadhguru: Or were you born with one billion people?
VirenderSehwag: (Laughs)Yeah, born alone.
Sadhguru: Alone.
VirenderSehwag: Yeah.
Sadhguru: When you die, you will die alone.
Right now, within this body, you live alone.
VirenderSehwag: Yeah.
Sadhguru: You may do many other things.
All these other things come in between, and go in between, okay?
One way or the other.
This being… This piece of life is a complete piece of life as creator has made.
This doesn’t become complete by making additions to it.
It’s incomplete human beings, who’ve invented those things.
This is a complete piece of life.
So, bringing this into your life –
there are methods to do this that
VirenderSehwag: Yeah.
Sadhguru: That, every day, if s… If you simply close your eyes and sit for a few minutes,
you must be able to shut off everything.
VirenderSehwag: Yeah.
Sadhguru: If this happens in your daily life,
when you go and stand there,
it’s just a business between you and the ball, that’s all,
and that’s all it should be.
This business does not involve your family,
does not involve India,
does not involve anything.
It just involves the laws of physics,
the ball, the bat, and you, that’s all.
VirendarSehwag: Really appreciate
I want to ask a question that when I am playing
there is a couple of negative thoughts comes in my mind that you know,
when the bowler is running and I was taking and is ready to deliver the ball,
suddenly the thought comes –
hit the ball.
And that… If that thought comes, it’s really difficult to control that thought at that time
because I’m about to hit…about to play that ball.
So how I will control that thought?
What should I tell or what should I do to control that thought?
Sadhguru: Hit the ball is not a bad thought! (Laughs)
VirenderSehwag: Yeah it’s not bad thought, but still you know
I can’t hit every ball.
Sadhguru: No, that is true.
But looking at your track record
you’ve hit the ball pretty well.
So, that thought is a good thought not a bad thought
but it should not become a compulsive thought.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: And above all
See this is something that all of us have to understand –
whether it’s your playing cricket or you are running a business or
whatever you may be doing –
there is something called as reality.
There is something called as impressions of reality that we carry within ourselves.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: Suppose you never played cricket in your life
for the first time you stand there
if a ball comes at you,
you’d naturally like to look at it,
how it comes and then hit it.
Only because you’ve played cricket for a certain number of years,
now you have this thought,
because there is a score to fulfill and there are expectations
this time India has to win and so many things,
you know expectations of one billion people
all that stuff.
But actually you don’t play a game.
I would call everything a game in life.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: Whether you are on a playing field or you are on any other field,
it is a kind of a game.
You don’t play any game.
Well, you don’t win a game
because you want to win.
You won’t hit a ball because you want to hit.
It is only because you do something right, it all works.
So if you want to do something right
if you want to do anything right,
first thing is we are able to grasp the situation for what it is.
You are expecting the ball at hundred and sixty kilometers per hour,
suppose he lets it out at sixty kilometers per hour,
it’s the easiest things to hit probably.
But you may miss it simply because
you are expecting it to happen in a certain way.
This expectation is coming because
your memory is projecting into reality and making an unreal reality.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: So if there is an intelligent bowler he reads this and
he will make those things and
It is not always the fastest bowler or the one who spins most
who may gets the wickets.
It’s one who reads the batsman’s expectations
and just does the reverse of that who
who manages to fox the batsman.
So it doesn’t matter which aspect of life,
whether sport or otherwise, the important thing is
we are able to grasp what is there and do the appropriate action.
In a sport, it becomes very
what to say… a kind of focused
because so many people are watching and we know if you don’t hit the ball right,
all of us know it.
Somebody is driving, if he
instead of missing the pothole if he hits the pothole,
maybe not everybody notices.
Somebody is doing business,
instead of doing the right thing if he goes little off,
maybe not too many people notice it.
But in sport if you don’t hit the ball,
if you don’t take the ball in the center of the bat,
all of us notice it.
Not just you.
Not just the bowler,(Laughs)
every one of us know that you didn’t hit it right.
So because of that all this is building up.
I was just talking to somebody and then the
you know just then
somebody was telling me,
“We got to beat Pakistan this time.”
I said, “Don’t try to beat Pakistan, just hit the ball.” (Laughs)
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: If you want to beat Pakistan, they’ll wage a war, okay?
You don’t try to beat Pakistan.
All you have to do is hit the ball.
If you try to beat Pakistan
Pakistan is not in the ball, it will be somewhere there.
In trying to beat that, all that’ll happen is you’ll go and sit in the pavilion.
That’s all that’ll happen.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: In human mind, there is perception, there is memory, there is imagination.
People are not able to keep these things separate.
There is memory of the game.
There is imagination of how you will carry the cup.
And there is a reality of a ball coming at you.
It is only the reality that you can handle.
Memory and imagination you can only fancy with.
One is about that which is over, one is
one is about that which is yet to happen.
Reality is, the ball is coming and you have a bat in your hand,
you have to hit it the way the ball deserves it.
Not the way India deserves it,
not the way Pakistan deserves it,
not the way somebody else deserves it.
You have to hit the wall the way the ball deserves it,
the way it’s coming.
So to keep this clarity of mind,
there are methods with which you can hold your mind in such a way
that this moment if I sit here,
the memory of who I am
my parentage, my upbringing, my growing up, my things
things that I know - if all these things come right now in my mind,
I will not perceive what is here.
Memory will play.
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: Memory is not a reality
VirenderSehwag: Yes.
Sadhguru: …because it is about something that is over
which does not exist.
That which is… does not exist –
if it impedes into that which exists,
you’ll miss that which exists.
This is so in everybody’s life.
But in a sportsperson’s life,
the effect of that is immediate.
In other people’s lives, it’ll pay out and they will see it after sometime that it doesn’t work.
But with your life, it’s right there. (Snaps)
You are either at the crease or you are sitting up there and clapping for somebody.
It’s very clear. (Laughs)
So because of that it stands out.
But this is true for everybody’s life.
So doing
See when you are given such a sophisticated mechanism called mind
human mind is not a simple thing, it’s a magnificent mechanism.
Even if you buy a phone, a simple phone which they’re calling it’s smart, it’s
It’s not as smart as you. (Laughter)
But, even if you buy a phone, you have to read a manual,
which runs into twenty pages of how to use it.
They are not telling you how it works,
they’re only telling you how to use it, will take a certain amount of study.
If you want to know how it works it will take much more amount of study.
Did you ever read the user manual for your brain?
VirenderSehwag: No.
Sadhguru: That’s the whole thing. (Laughs)
We are not looking at how this works.
Simply we are trying to use it.
By… nature or by accident, people may get to use it,
but not consciously.
VirenderSehwag: What is… is there is a method or this is a technique to use it?
Sadhguru: There is a method.
There is a very established method.
VirenderSehwag: Okay. My next question is, is that only how I’ll control that thought.
Sadhguru: Don’t try to control it, you need to liberate yourself from this!
See, I am not talking about controlling your mind.
I am talking about liberating it from all kinds of additions that it has added on!
If you control your body, if you control your mind, what it means is,
Control means to hold it within certain limits,
but you’ve become who you are in the world only because you cross the limits.
Only because you cross the limits that other people never cross,
you’ve become whoever you are, in the world.
So the method should be, not of control,
but of liberation.
Over a period of time you gathered a body and a certain level of mind.
These two - if we know how to use it to our advantage,
it will work one way.
But a whole lot of humanity uses their body and their mind to their disadvantage.
Their body and mind are the biggest problems that they have in their life.
So, to make this body and mind in such a way that you don’t have to control them –
what would you like to control?
You would like to control something that’s gone berserk.
You would like to control something which is destructive.
Why would you like to control something that is creative,
something that is competent,
something that is capable?
Why would you like to control that?
Would you like to control your intelligence?
Because if we
If there is a certain level of ignorance, you want to control it.
Would you like to control your intelligence?
Would you like to control your physical strength?
Would you like to control anything?
You would want to liberate it,
you would want to focus it,
you would want to put it into proper use.
If this has to happen,
the most fundamental thing –
there are various other methods.
If you have the necessary time, more sophisticated methods can be approached.
Necessary time does not mean you have to spend twelve hours a day or something.
If you spend twenty to thirty minutes a day,
you can do miraculous things for yourself.
Because you know how to play the game,
you know how to do all that,
all that it takes is little more clarity at that moment,
and the body and mind responds with much more ease.
Rather than tension, and fear, and anxiety,
it responds with ease.
There is substantial scientific and medical information today
to clearly say only when you’re at ease,
your body and mind functions at its best.
we have given it to the cricket team also.
I don’t know if it reached you.
This is called as Isha Kriya.
This is a simple process.
The important thing is to make a distinction between
what is you and what is not you.
When I say what is you and what is not you –
whatever you associate yourself with, after some time,
you start experiencing it as myself
because somewhere in your mind, you identify with it.
Starting from the most fundamental thing –
it goes into various things,
which causes enormous amount of disturbance and misery,
but the most basic thing, which breeds this,
is your own body and your mind.
When we say your mind, your mind is largely the thought process and emotions that go on there.
This thought process and emotion mainly happens the way it happens
because of the type of memory that you have gathered there.
Obviously you gathered memory over a period of time, isn’t it?
The body, the physical body,
from the time when you were born and how you are today,
you gathered this over a period of time.
Anything that you can gather can be yours,
but can never, ever be you, isn’t it?
So to create a distinction between what is you and what is not you.
If this distinction arises,
which is what Isha Kriya does –
if you bring this distinction into your life,
you will see suddenly your ability to use your body and your mind
is phenomenally enhanced, many, many fold.
The same body and same mind, simply because
you’re not tangled up with it,
you can use it so... so much better simply because
there is a little bit of space between you and your body
and you and your mind.
This is guaranteed from me.
VirenderSehwag: Okay. Thank you.
Sadhguru: The color of the clothes
or the colors of anything around you,
does it have some impact?
You need to understand this.
How color happens, first of all?
Why this seems to be white right now
is because when the light falls on it,
it reflects all of it,
so it looks white.
Why this seems to be red right now,
is not because it’s red.
It is just that it holds back all the colors
and only reflects red.
That’s why you’re seeing red.
And what is red for you
may not be red for some other creature.
If you dress up really jazzy colors
and go and stand in front of your dog
he looks at you in an uninterested way,
because he doesn’t see any color,
he sees everything black and white,
do you know this?
Don’t dress up for him, okay?
Dog lovers, I’m saying.
You wear only black and white, dog lovers.
Nothing else works.
You don’t impress him with red, green, blue and whatever.
So, color is not what it is,
color is what it gives away.
What you reflect will be your color.
What you hold will not be your color.
This is the nature of life,
not just of color.
This is the nature of life itself.
Today if you radiate love,
people will see you as a loving human being.
If you hold back all your love,
because you’re a very… you’re a love bank,
you’re full of love,
but you don’t radiate,
people will think you’re
that
If you radiate joy, people will think,
‘Oh, he’s a joyful person.’
If you are a joy bank,
you held back all your joy
because you want to take it to heaven,
people won’t experience you as a joyful human being, isn’t it?
What you give away is always your quality, isn’t it so?
So that is not just for a human being,
that is the nature of the Existence itself.
What is thrown away is the quality of that substance.
Now, this reflects everything,
so this is white.
That reflects only red, so it is red.
That reflects only blue so it is blue.
Everything else is held back.
What it holds back you don’t see.
What it gives away is what you see.
So, how is color significant for human consciousness as such,
or for any kind of spiritual process?
It is significant in the sense
that the color that you reflect,
will naturally add to the aura that you carry.
People on the ascetic path don’t want to wear anything,
because they don’t want to
add any new things to them.
They just want to work with what they have.
They don’t want to take on anything more.
What you are right now, to work that out
is quite substantial.
Adding one more thing and one more thing,
it complicates.
So they don’t want anything, they walk naked.
If socially walking naked is difficult,
they will put on one little loin cloth
so that socially there is no issue.
But the idea is,
they don’t take on anything more than what they are.
They know what they are is substantial.
There’re other aspects to it, that's different.
I’m saying about the color.
So orange,
the chakras in the body,
all the hundred and fourteen chakras
or rather hundred and twelve chakras
ascribe to some color.
The two do not ascribe to any color,
because they’re not physical in nature.
Anything that’s physical in the existence
naturally reflects light.
You understand what I’m saying?
Anything that’s physical in the existence reflects light.
Once it reflects light,
it will have color in your perception.
It may not have any particular color,
or it may not have the color that you’re seeing,
you’re only seeing what’s being reflected.
What you’re seeing is the reflected light.
You’re not seeing the color of the substance
that you’re seeing.
You’re not seeing color of the thing that you’re seeing.
You’re only seeing the color of the reflected light.
Black reflects nothing.
It holds back everything,
so it becomes black.
You see,
we say the grass is green,
no, the grass is not green.
It is giving away green,
so we see it is green.
The sky is blue
no, no, no,
the sky is not blue.
You go there and see, there is no blue out there.
Sky is blue for a completely different reason,
because the refraction quality of the color blue is different
from the other colors;
that’s why the sky is blue.
So why is it that spiritual processes
for different types of processes we use different kind of colors is
those who are on a path
where they don’t want to gather anything,
they will wear white.
Those who are into a different kind of sadhana,
if their sadhana is mild,
but they are on the spiritual path,
but they are involved with various aspects of life,
they don’t want to gather life around them.
They want to be participating in life
but they don’t want to gather anything,
such people will choose to wear white.
People who are on a more intense sadhana,
which is oriented towards a particular chakra in the body
which is known as Agna, between the eyebrows,
they will wear orange,
because the color of the chakra is orange.
They want to radiate that color,
because the whole process is about enlightenment
and reaching to that state of knowing,
opening up that dimension of perception
which is referred to as the third eye,
so they will seek always ochre,
or orange color
because that is the color of the Agna.
The yellow robes were worn by Buddhist monks
because the process that Gautama gave
to the initial stage of Buddhist monks,
was very rudimentary process.
He chose this process for the people
because it did not need any preparation.
but he wants to cause a wave of awareness.
That means he doesn’t stay in any town for more than a day,
continuously he's moving from village to village,
town to town.
There’s no time to prepare people for any kind of practice,
so the practice that he gives them is very rudimentary,
but still he’s converting them into monks.
He's fixing their life
but not giving them enough preparatory steps.
So he told them to wear the yellow robe,
because yellow is the color of the Mooladhara.
The most basic chakra in the body is Mooladhara,
so he wants them to be stable.
For a monk the most important thing is he practices stability in his life.
So he just wants them to be stable.
They don’t have to fly off into a blissful experience.
They don’t have to get enlightened right now,
they don’t have to get anywhere,
they just have to learn to be stable,
because he is preparing soldiers to shake the world with awareness.
So he told them to wear yellow robes.
Later on, when they graduated to what he called as arhats,
the arhats in the Buddhist tradition,
wore ochre robes,
that is orange as all the Indian sanyasis wear.
But then after Gautama passed away,
when they tried to spread the Buddhist way of life,
people in India they were at least 30% of the population were sanyasis or monks by nature.
By culture it was just like that.
So this one more set of monks,
they just accepted them and they became kind of part of them,
they couldn’t maintain a distinct identity.
So from ochre they shifted to little more maroonish color,
more for an identity sake,
because they would simply mix with all the other yogis
and monks who were walking all over the place.
So they wanted to set up a distinct identity,
so they switched to a little maroonish color later on.
But the basic Buddhist color is still yellow,
because yellow is the color of the Mooladhara,
and it can be taught without preparation.
No preparation, no teaching, no nothing,
a simple process just to stabilize and stabilize and stabilize
Such a process is taught
when you are charting out a spiritual path for a few lifetimes.
See, that tradition still continues in the Buddhist way of life.
They keep coming back and coming back
to do more work and more work
because the process is such, it’s of stabilization,
not of realization.
So that's why the yellow.
Devi is always red because
red is the most vibrant color.
Of all the colors, red is the most vibrant color
and feminine represents that.
whether you like it or not
there is a longing in a woman to be like a flower.
because nature has given that possibility for her.
There is a certain quality in the feminine
which is flowery.
So, when we say a flower,
the first thing that comes into most people’s mind is always red.
A red flower is always the real flower;
other things are on the way.
Red is vibrant.
It is the color of vibrance.
Devi,
or the feminine form of the Divine,
is the most vibrant form of Divine.
Something nobody can miss.
The reason why,
even if there are other bigger temples,
in every village,
in every town in India,
we will set up a Devi temple,
You walk into the Devi temple,
she hits you in the face,
you can't miss it,
because it’s vibrant.
The color of vibrance is always red.
If… it doesn’t matter what kind of a person you are,
if you come dressed in full red clothes,
suddenly people will think
you’re vibrant...
even if you’re not.
Yes or no?
red dress,
suddenly sets you off like you’re vibrant.
And to do certain type of sadhana which is Devi oriented,
red is needed.
The most important things in your life
are usually red, you know,
your blood is red.
If it’s not red enough you
you go down, you know.
Flowers are red,
the rising sun can become
reaching towards red,
anything that you consider
as vibrantly alive
you tend to paint it red,
because there is a connection
between red and vibrance.
And Devi is manifestation of vibrance that you cannot miss.
So the Devi temples always have very active involvement of red,
in many ways
only red flowers are used.
Blood is spilled all over the place.
We don’t do the blood business,
but one way or the other it needs lot of spilling of life.
Either you must know how to spill your life just like that
without killing yourself,
if you do not know the technology
you have to kill.
We know the technology, so we don’t kill.
Somebody else who do not know the technology of spilling life
without killing the body,
they will cut the body.
Most Devi temples have daily sacrifice.
So colors have some impact.
It definitely influences a few things.
But it’s not everything.
Sadhguru: Good morning and welcome to every one of you
to this
Isha Insight twenty-fourteen (Referring to 2014),
the third edition of Isha Insight.
History is replete with many events where
individual leaders because of their insight and their commitment,
have changed the course of what happens on this planet.
At the same time,
there are also many disastrous events on the planet
when leaders operated without the necessary insight
and did things which caused enormous disasters on this planet.
So leadership at any level,
whether you’re running your own business
or a state or a nation or whatever,
in whichever way if you’re touching a certain number of people in a day,
I consider you a leader.
So being a leader...
three basic qualities which sets a leader apart
and makes him into a fruitful proposition for everybody around him is
his integrity,
his ability to inspire people to do the right things
and above all,
insight.
So, these three qualities of
integrity, inspiration and the necessary insight into the activity that we’re performing.
As I said,
without integrity we will not set the necessary ambience for success.
Inspiration...
if you do not have an infectious level of inspiration,
that people around you are fired up just by seeing you
and the way you function, if that doesn’t happen,
a certain level of sloth,
an inertia will set into the atmosphere.
Inertia means it’s death, you know,
if somebody becomes inert, that’s called death.
So situations will die,
we may be doing great things
but if the necessary inspiration cannot be generated moment to moment on a daily basis,
whatever great things we’ve been doing...
many great things have floundered simply because
the necessary inspiration was missing in the atmosphere.
And insight above all,
insight is your ability to see something
that the majority of the people do not see.
When you become a leader
either you grew into your leadership
or you were born into it
or you are elected
or whichever way
when you become a leader, leadership gives you a higher perch.
If you sit on a higher perch than the rest
and if you do not see any better than the others,
then you will become an object of ridicule.
So insight into what we’re doing...
being a leader is like being a captain of a ship.
If you are the captain of the ship,
you don’t have to do the hard work that the crew is doing
but you must be able to chart out a successful path.
You must be able to see everything that is there right now
and you must be able to foresee that which cannot be seen right now.
So this responsibility is fulfilled
only if one develops a certain level of insight.
Above all, we want to genetically engineer your DNA in the next four days for success
because success is the sweetest thing in human life.
Interviewer (Shilpa Reddy): I wanted to know,
did this figure come into your mind, I mean he’s so gorgeous,
how long did it take to give him such a beautiful face (Sadhguru laughs)
and did you envision it in your mind
(Sadhguru): I think I took about two-and-a-half years to design the face
because it was clear in my mind
what should come out of the face.
What should come out of the face is this,
tell me if it is coming out of this face according to your perception.
What I wanted was,
I wanted the face to represent
a... a certain sense of equanimity,
that’s one thing,
stability and equanimity.
At the same time, it should represent a certain sense of exuberance.
it must also show that it’s a focused, aware kind of face.
At the same time, there is an inebriation.
What do you think?
Does he exude all those things or no?
You can tell me honestly, no problem.
Interviewer (Shilpa Reddy): Very, very well said.
Sadhguru: So there is exuberance,
there is equanimity,
there is a certain drunkenness,
there is a certain meditativeness.
This is what I wanted in the face,
so in my mind, because you know I have no brains,
I just... lot of space
Interviewer: Why would you say that
Sadhguru: No, because that’s why I can create things. I don’t have...
Interviewer: Clutter...
Sadhguru: ...memories.
Memories are there but they don’t come up on my mind.
My mind is an empty screen, most of the time.
When I kind of visualize something,
initially we thought we will create a full image.
We created full images in models and computer models and also real life models
like in cement and other things, we tried to do.
None of them looked like the way I wanted them.
Because this is what Adiyogi is,
that he is absolute exuberance, at the same time equanimity.
He’s a householder, he’s a ascetic.
He’s a dancer and he’s still.
So these qualities kind of crystalized in my mind in a certain way
and it took about two-and-a-half years for me
to get it down into a computer screen or on a paper,
but our boys (Laughs) –
hats off to them –
they delivered him in eight months.
Sadhguru: Namaskaram.
On this Guru Poornima,
my best wishes and blessings to all of you.
The significance of this day,
in terms of exploring human possibilities,
is unparalleled
because it’s on this day a little over 15,000 years ago,
that Adiyogi
for the first time chose to turn himself
into a means of transmission,
transmitting a dimension which was unheard of till then,
predating all religion,
predating all ideologies.
For the first time,
he brought this possibility into human life that
if you are willing to strive,
if you are willing to strive,
you can cross all the limitations that have been set upon you
by your own means or by nature.
You can transcend all this if you are willing to strive.
He not only said this,
he not only opened up this possibility,
he expounded the entire science and technologies
and various methods and practices
through which an individual human being can rise beyond all limitations.
The idea of transcendence
only happened on this day.
The idea of transcendence was first brought into
to the human race only on this day.
So this day has always been celebrated
as one of the most significant days
for those who are aspiring to be something more than who they are right now.
Tell me one person
who is not aspiring to be something more than what he or she is right now.
It is just that
each person is aspiring to be something more
within the limitations of what they know.
One person’s idea of something more may be money,
another person’s idea of something more may be wealth,
another person’s idea of something more may be knowledge,
love,
pleasure.
But there is no human being
who is not aspiring to be something more than what they are right now.
The aspiration is universal.
The currency employed for this aspiration may be of various kinds.
Now the question is –
how many who aspire for this something more,
realize that more is not going to fulfill this being (Referring to oneself)?
If you get that something more that you are aspiring for today,
tomorrow you will aspire for something more.
If that happens, something more
because this (Referring to oneself) is not aspiring for more,
this is aspiring for all.
So he brought this awareness to start with,
with the seven sages who gathered around him.
Today, they are celebrated in this country as Sapta Rishis
and they in turn brought it to humanity in so many different ways.
The significance of the day is that,
that it is a shift
it is the first full moon day after the shifting of the solstice.
This time,
certain calendar adjustments have moved it to the second,
but normally it is the first full moon day.
It is also a time when the sun begins to move southward in relation
with this planet on which we are.
So, it is also a time,
which is a time
which is best for receiving grace for variety of reasons.
So, this day was one day,
which was universally celebrated in this part of the world at one time.
This system of celebrating Guru Poornima
and becoming available to grace
got dislocated only after the British took over
and made sure that you have to go to office on that day (Laughs).
So, this grand celebration that used to happen across the country
in this entire region, not just in India
kind of got little dislocated
because it is a day when you have to go to work,
so things got disturbed.
But still,
in this country at least,
still millions and millions of people are conscious that
this is a day of grace,
this is a day they can easily become available to grace
and hence it’s lived on.
A time has come in the history of humanity,
where our ability to do things in the outside world
has almost become superhuman.
When I say superhuman,
I want you to understand,
a thousand years ago or even a hundred years ago,
what an individual human being could do
and what an individual human being can do today,
simply because of the aid of science and technology,
is literally superhuman.
I am sure a hundred years ago,
if you pulled out something from your pocket and spoke to somebody in America right now,
people would definitely think you are superhuman or more.
Believe me,
if you had a cellphone hundred years ago,
you could have claimed you’re god
and they would have believed it.
You just got your phones too late (Laughter).
So, once humanity is empowered like this on various levels,
it’s extremely important that
raising of human consciousness becomes of paramount importance.
And raising of human consciousness essentially means this,
that your longing to expand,
wanting to be something more
you find a vehicle through which you can expand limitlessly.
So, Adiyogi on this day transmitted
one hundred and twelve ways
in which one can expand limitlessly.
Hundred and twelve ways –
enough variety for you (Laughs),
if you don’t like one, you can pick the other –
one hundred and twelve ways in which you can attain to a limitless expansion.
So, here we are on this day
and I am supposed to hang out (Laughter/Applause).
When we generally say hangout we mean just (Laughter)
it’s a gossipy session,
so no problem (Laughs)
because when it comes to inner dimensions,
you can only gossip because (Laughs)
you cannot talk about it,
you can only talk around it.
So, we can only gossip.
So, it’s appropriate, we just hanging out with you.
Please
Arundhathi: The very first question in our Google Hangout session is
from an online participant called Cyrus from Maryland, USA.
And Cyrus’ question Sadhguru is
that many people firmly believe that people do not require a guru to become enlightened.
Rather, they believe that the power to become enlightened lies within us
and is within our control.
Is it realistic to think that we can achieve enlightenment without a guru?
Sadhguru: In Maryland?
Now,
if we have to learn something as simple as ABC, alphabets,
twenty-six only in English language –
Samskrit (Sanskrit?) has fifty-four,
Tamil has two hundred-odd (Laughs)
twenty-six only,
twenty-six alphabets.
How many of you believe that
if you did not have a teacher,
you would have learnt these twenty-six alphabets?
That’s the answer (Laughs) (Applause).
And especially if you want to walk an uncharted path,
new terrain,
if you go into new terrain,
it is sensible to take instructions, believe me.
Otherwise,
you could try an adventure
but even those who adventure,
these days use a GPS.
Earlier, they used maps or they listened to the locals.
Those who do not want to listen to another human being who has already walked the terrain
and think they can do it by themselves
nothing wrong,
I am not saying they cannot, they can, why not?
After all, you are only trying to walk the inner territory.
It’s just that
what you could do in a short span of time,
you may do it in a million years.
If I ask you
I think almost all of you are wearing a watch.
This is not some rocket science,
just a watch.
They have been ticking around for hundreds of years now.
I will give you all the parts of this watch,
dismantle and give it to you.
Put it together, let me see.
No, no,
I am not asking you to manufacture a watch,
it’s all there.
We’ll dismantle it and give it to you,
put it together let me see.
We will give you a manual, how to do it.
Please do it and see, let me see.
You will have a watch but you won’t tick (Laughter).
Similarly on the spiritual path,
without guidance you want to go –
all the best (Laughter),
no problem.
It’s just that unnecessary (Applause)
unnecessary hardship you will create for yourself.
If you like it the hard way – fine,
what’s the problem?
Some people like suffering.
They think nothing good can come out of life unless you suffer.
If you are
If you are that kind, it’s all right.
But my intention
my intention is people should walk this path blissfully,
joyfully –
ecstatic if it’s possible (Applause).
If you want to go on a tour joyfully,
better to go on a guided tour,
believe me (Laughs).
Please.
Arundhathi: Our next question is from the international cricketing legend
and well-loved Indian batsman Virender Sehwag (Applause).
Sadhguru: Oh, he speaks with his bat (Laughter/Applause).
It’s a technology issue,
it’s not him, okay (Laughter)?
Arundhathi: I’m afraid I will have to read the question while we sort out the audio issue.
The question is –
why don’t people just share their knowledge Sadhguru,
why do they withhold it?
Why don’t they share it the way you do?
Sadhguru: Oh!
This is the age of intellectual property (Laughter/Applause).
Somebody even wants to patent yogasanas.
You can patent the asana
but still you can’t get into it (Laughter).
You may have patented all the difficult asanas
but can you get into it - that’s the question.
So, we have come to a place in the world,
where everything is monetized.
Everything has a commercial angle to it.
So, because of that,
as people have been miserly with money,
now they are miserly with knowledge,
because you know, knowledge is money.
So they are miserly with that because it’s money in some way.
So, this monetizing of everything can really destroy many things in this world.
In this culture, we always fixed it like this –
spiritual process,
health-related things
and education,
these three things should never be commercialized.
Everything else can be commercialized.
These three things should always be offered (Applause).
The question is only about the qualification of the recipient.
All kinds of people come and say,
“I want to go,
I want to do this,
I want to do that.”
Two days later, they won't be here.
So, the question is only about the qualifications of the recipient.
If that one thing is ensured,
knowledge should be offered
irrespective of commercial interests that are involved in it.
But today, everything is commercialized
and in many ways, you can’t help it
because the whole momentum is in that direction.
Virender may be willing to share his knowledge.
He may teach ten different people
how to hold the bat,
how to hit the ball,
how to stand,
how to do this,
how to do that.
But how many will go about scoring double centuries after double centuries (Laughs) (Applause)
because to get a qualified recipient is not easy.
It’s not easy.
Knowledge may be there.
When it comes to experiential knowing,
how many people are willing to receive it?
Everybody says, “Yes!”
I every day meet people –
“All the way, Sadhguru, I want to go all the way” (Laughter).
Tomorrow morning,
they are crying because somebody said something.
They want to leave.
Day after tomorrow morning,
their uncle’s daughter’s birthday they want to go (Laughter).
I am not saying there’s anything wrong with your uncle’s daughter (Laughs).
All I am saying is your interests are many.
That means you are not going anywhere.
You can dabble with many but there must be one direction to life,
otherwise you are not going far,
you’re going to wander around here.
If you want to go, penetrate through something and go a distance,
you need some one-pointedness.
People come here,
they say, “Sadhguru, you give me any kind of sadhana.
I am willing to die, Sadhguru” (Laughs).
I say, “Don’t die, hold it (Laughter).
I am willing to offer anything, but hold it,
we will see, we will go step by step.”
Three days later, they come and say
“Sadhguru, you know Sadhguru, I have
I have found somebody Sadhguru,
I think for lifetimes this person must have been waiting for me.
I saw this girl and phoo” (Laughter/Applause).
Now… Now there is a spiritual angle to it.
“It looks like for lifetimes we have known each other” (Laughter/Applause).
If you have known somebody for lifetimes
and you didn’t make it,
it’s best you keep away from them (Laughter/Applause)
because for most people,
their direction of life keeps changing every other day.
It’s hard to offer anything,
it’s all bits and pieces.
Of course, there are also people who think...
See knowledge is not something that you own because
knowledge is not about you,
knowledge is about the creation,
about the nature of the creation.
What is already there is what you have absorbed.
You didn’t invent it,
you didn’t come up with it,
you only saw it.
This is why the language in this country is very clear.
When it comes to any kind of spiritual dimension,
we are only talking about realization.
Realizing means something that was always there,
always right here,
but you were so stupid you didn’t see it,
today you saw it.
I realized.
I did not attain,
I did not arise,
I did not climb somewhere,
I just realized.
But the thing was always here.
So, what is here all the time as truth
cannot belong to somebody.
Nobody can stop you from it
but those who have access –
if they have truly accessed –
they will never block you,
they will never hold back.
Only those who have accumulated from books and stuff,
they will hold back
because any accumulated stuff is limited
and it will get over.
If you give away everything, it will get over
tomorrow morning, you won’t know what to do.
So, you will hold it and be miserly because you have gathered it.
What is gathered you can hold back,
what you have realized you cannot hold back because it’s an endless run.
You only constantly wishing
there is somebody here, who can soak it up as fast as you can give it.
That is the problem.
The problem is of lack of receptivity, not of holding back (Laughs) –
if you really know.
But if you have acquired knowledge
you will be miserly
because you can only acquire that much,
you don’t want it… don’t want it to get over.
Knowledge is like money again (Laughs),
it can get over (Applause).
Arundhathi: Our next question comes from Bryn,
who is a circus performer and teacher based in France.
I’m afraid I have to read this question as well
while the technical difficulties are being sorted out.
Bryn’s question is –
people living in western societies have many distractions at every corner.
How do we maintain a focus in our daily lives
to best receive what you have to offer?
Sadhguru: Oh! The distraction is not only in the West (Laughter/Applause).
For those who want to be distracted, there is distractions everywhere,
not only in the West.
And not just today, even a thousand years ago
people were still distracted, believe me.
Don’t think thousand years ago,
everybody was focused and fantastic –
no.
They were just as good as you or as bad as you (Laughs).
They were also hanging out in small groups (Laughter),
now we are hanging out globally (Laughs).
So, what is that one thing I have to do
to be focused or to be able to receive what is offered?
Very simple –
just remind yourself,
tomorrow morning, when you wake up in the morning,
just check (Gestures),
still alive (Applause)
because every day over a million people die on this planet.
You woke up tomorrow morning,
over a million people did not wake up tomorrow morning
will not wake up tomorrow morning, believe me.
You woke up, just check (Gestures), you’re still there –
great, isn’t it?
You’re still alive.
Can you at least smile,
“Oh I am still alive – great!”
Just check those three-four-five people who really matter in your life,
check if all of them are alive
because if one million people die,
at least ten million people lost somebody who is dear to them, isn't it?
So all those who are… who really matter for you,
you are alive, they are alive – fantastic today.
It’s a great day, isn't it (Applause)?
Don’t take this lightly, this’s not a joke
because (Laughs)
I am reminding you of this
because most of you think,
“Other people die (Laughter).
Ah, not me,
it’s only others who die.”
No, no, you and me will die.
“Sadhguru, I am asking a spiritual question,
you’re reminding me of morbid things.
” No, nothing morbid about it.
Death is the one common denominator among all of us, isn't it?
Yes?
One thing common about us,
whether you are black, white, blue, yellow,
whatever kind you are,
man, woman or other six genders (Laughter),
whatever you may be,
one common denominator among all of us is,
we will die one day.
Tch, look at the universality of death (Laughs).
Only when you remind yourself that you are mortal,
wanting to know something beyond the physicality of who you are
becomes an active process.
You will become receptive
only when you know the body that you carry,
the psychological drama that you are going through,
all this is going on,
but (Snaps his fingers) one day, pup, it will end.
Very easily (Laughs) it will end, believe me.
You just have to wait (Laughs).
See, you don’t have to do anything to achieve death.
Just have to wait (Laughs)
both for yours and others.
People come and say,
“Sadhguru this guy, my enemy I can’t bear it.”
I say, “Just wait (Laughter/Applause).
You don’t have to take the trouble, just wait” (Laughter).
One way or the other you will get rid of him,
either he will die or you will die Laughter/Applause).”
So, do this every hour, tch
“Right now, 7:30.
Oh, I am still alive, great” (Laughter).
Today from 6:30 to 7:30,
you know how many people died on the planet?
“But it’s not me, right now.”
Now, if you are continuously conscious of your mortal nature,
you will become one hundred percent alive
to the spiritual dimension of who you are.
Only because somewhere,
it’s not that intellectually you do not know,
but experientially you are immortal, you know.
Because when I look at the number of shoes you have bought (Laughter),
it looks like you are going to live for 10,000 years (Laughter).
Number of clothes and shoes, when I look at them,
it looks like lot of people are planning for 1,000, 10,000 years of life.
No, no, no, it’s a brief life.
If you know it’s a brief life
and you are definitely mortal
We will try to stretch it with yoga.
Tch… Hmm?
We will try to stretch it and make it little longer (Applause) but (Laughs)
anyway, you will die.
If you are conscious of this every moment of your life
Initially, because you are in Europe,
because particularly you are in Europe
and you have always believed you are immortal (Laughs),
it may be little struggle in… in the beginning.
But still, remind yourself every minute that “I am mortal.
I’ll die someday and maybe it’s today.”
Come to ease with death,
then the longing to know what is beyond this physical nature
will burst forth within you.
Once this longing comes,
you are one hundred percent receptive to everything that I represent (Applause).
Arundhathi: The next question comes from Divya Bharathi Ramaswamy,
who is doing an MA in Computer Science in Zurich, Switzerland.
Sadhguru: Is she talking kind or no (Referring to technical difficulties in playing videos from earlier questioners) (Laughter)?
Divya: (Laughs) Namaskaram Sadhguru. My question is –
would marriage be only a hindrance if someone (Audio disturbance) spiritually ___ (Unclear), especially women.
And also, for someone who has gone through ____ (Unclear) yourself,
what would you say, from your experience (Laughter)?
Sadhguru: Something about would marriage be a hindrance, something, okay
(Laughs).
Is marriage a hindrance for one’s spiritual journey?
See, marriage is not a commodity that you carry on your head,
but many people carry it on their head.
It’s just an arrangement,
so that socially, there is some sense to the way
you fulfill the needs that you have.
A human being has needs –
physical,
psychological,
emotional,
financial,
social,
various kinds of needs.
To fulfill these things in a dignified manner,
we came up with something called marriage,
so that it is fulfilled within a framework,
your desires don’t run wild
and disturb everything in the society,
some kind of a framework
so that it can be conducted in a sensible manner.
Now you have raised this to heaven
because somebody told you,
“Marriages are made in heaven” (Laughter).
Only the unmarried ones think so (Laughter/Applause).
So it’s just two people, all right?
Now, spiritual process is about turning inward.
Can I turn inward with somebody else (Laughs)?
Marriage is an arrangement to fulfill certain aspect of your life.
Don’t complicate life by thinking,
“We will walk together on the spiritual path.”
There is no such thing
because spiritual path is not (Laughs)
not the path that you take into the Velliangiri Mountains,
that you want to walk together.
Even if you go to Velliangiri Mountains,
please don’t walk hand-in-hand (Laughter).
It’s a narrow pathway
and it’s not an appropriate way to walk in the forest (Laughs).
You can walk in the park hand-in-hand.
You can go shopping hand-in-hand.
You can sit in a cinema hand-in-hand.
You can’t turn inward hand-in-hand (Applause).
Now, does it mean to say someone who is married,
what it
Let’s understand this.
Someone who is married means
someone who’s made an official arrangement for their needs in life.
A formal arrangement for simple needs that a human being has,
which are biological,
which are psychological,
which are social, many things.
So, these arrangements that you have made,
conduct these arrangements gracefully,
so there will be time and space for you to turn around.
If you pay excess attention to these arrangements,
then turning around will not be possible.
This does not mean if you are alone, you will do it.
If you are alone, you may be always looking out (Laughs).
You will spend your entire time and life looking out for somebody.
That will also not help.
If you think your desires,
your longings
and your needs
can be well handled by an arrangement of marriage –
all right.
Don’t try to raise it to heaven.
It doesn’t happen in heaven, believe me.
And if heaven is making so many mistakes (Laughter),
then we will have to seriously reconsider many things (Laughs).
So, of course in India,
we don’t blame it on the heaven.
We do our own calculations.
Of all the arrangements of stars and planets and everything,
we match all the planets and stars very well.
It’s very easy to match stars because
they never fought ever (Laughter).
But to match these two people -
that nobody has managed,
except those two people if they are sensible (Laughs).
If they are sensible, they can manage it.
Nobody else can match these two people (Applause).
Priests have tried,
gods have tried,
ghosts and goblins have tried,
it’s not worked and not worked and not worked.
Two sensible people, they can manage.
If both of them understand the limitations of the arrangement
and the possibilities of the arrangement,
they can conduct it sensibly.
If you try to raise it to heaven,
you will see it will for sure crash.
So, your marriage has nothing to do with your spiritual process
because your spiritual process is an inward journey.
But one dimension of this is –
to walk alone, people falter.
Actually, this question was asked to Gautama the Buddha,
“Is it better to walk alone or in company?”
Gautama looked and said,
“It’s better to walk alone than to walk with a fool” (Laughs) (Applause)
because Gautama – not me, okay (Laughter) –
Gautama believes only a fool will marry you (Laughter/Applause).
It’s him,
not me, okay (Laughter)?
Please (Laughs)
Arundhathi: This is a question that comes from Stephanie in Malaysia.
Stephanie: Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Namaskaram. The first one who is speaking clearly (Laughter/Applause).
Stephanie: Having been to various international forums and met many great leaders,
where do you see the world heading,
for the better or worse?
Sadhguru: Oh (Laughs). Let me correct that question a bit.
Yes, I’ve been in international forums, met many leaders.
You added “great” leaders (Laughter).
So, many leaders – not always so great.
Yes, there are a few great leaders, no question about that.
Where is the world heading (Laughs)?
There are many possibilities
because we have capabilities and technologies,
which no other generation could ever dream of.
Will our capabilities turn against us
or will they work for us is the big question.
If all the human capabilities,
which are so hugely enhanced
because of technology
Everything that an individual human being could do
has expanded manifold.
In this enhanced state
And our numbers have increased tremendously.
In the beginning of twentieth century,
we were just about 1.5 billion people,
today we are 7.3 billion people.
The United Nations making predictions that by 2050,
we will be 9.7 billion people.
If all these people get educated, get technologically empowered,
9.7 billion people or nearly 10 billion people on this planet
is for sure going to be a disaster.
Yes.
We can make arrangements and arrangements,
we can improve the arrangements,
we can make more energy-saving machines,
we can recycle the shit (Laughter).
Yes (Laughs).
We can do all this
but if we don’t come to our senses with human populations,
there’s going to be
I want you to just imagine,
how the world will be
if the population almost goes up by fifty percent tomorrow.
Just imagine your town, how it will be
if fifty percent population increases tomorrow morning.
Or in other words,
no matter what we create,
no matter how much we strive,
whether
whatever we build,
everything is going to be insufficient
because the planet is going to be insufficient.
Of course, we are looking at planets
which could sustain life outside of this solar system.
We’ve found two-three very promising planets,
it’s just a little, you know, not in the walking distance (Laughter) -
a few (Laughs)
few thousand or a million light years away.
Great planets, I believe.
But this is the thing.
But nobody wants to address this issue.
Everybody wants to talk about cosmetic solutions,
not address the basic problem of expanding human population.
I was in a conference and I said,
“See, unless you (Laughs)
Unless you reduce the human footprint on the planet,
there is no solution for anything.”
Then they asked me a brilliant question,
“How do you reduce the human footprint?”
I said, “You have to reduce the number of feet (Laughter).
That’s the only way” (Laughs).
So, right now,
it doesn’t matter what others think,
all of you who are here
and those of you who’re hanging out with me,
we can take it upon ourselves
that we will not push the human population.
You can have a dog. (Questioner laughs)
She is there (Laughs) (Applause).
A husband and wife were having a debate –
whether to have a child or not.
The husband wanted a child,
the wife hesitating because
she will lose the shape of her body and you know (Laughter)
For a husband,
having a baby is simple (Laughter).
But for the woman,
it’s too many things involved.
So, debate was going on
and then they came and the debate moved into an area where,
“Should we have a baby or should we get a dog” (Laughter)?
Then they could not decide,
they went to a counselor,
they put their problem in front of him.
So, he said,
“You got to just make up your mind,
whether you want to ruin the carpets or your life” (Laughter/Applause).
I am not saying children are bad, they are wonderful,
but it’s just too many.
We as human beings,
we are wonderful but we are too many.
We’re so many that the insect population is going down (Laughter).
No, no, it’s not a joke, it’s very… it’s very threatening.
If the insect population disappears, the planet will be destroyed.
Yes.
The worms disappear,
the planet will be destroyed.
If you and me disappear, planet will flourish (Laughter/Applause).
So, leave the leaders alone
because in every conference that you meet,
very cosmetic solutions are being talked about –
how to adjust the market place, okay (Laughs),
how to do this, how to do that.
I… On immediate scale, yes,
those things are necessary.
But you are talking about what is the future of this world.
If that is so,
if we want a future for this world,
if we want our children and their children to live well on this planet,
the only way is to bring down human population –
not by doing some horrible acts,
but if we have
See, our life expectancy has improved.
This means we have taken death into our hands.
When we take death into our hands,
it is our business to take birth also into our hands, isn't it (Applause)?
If we convince the population of this one thing,
future is very bright,
because tomorrow morning the sun will come up,
what’s the problem (Laughs)?
Please
Arundhathi: The next question comes from Sahil Gurung from the United Kingdom.
Sahil Gurung: Namaskaram Sadhguruji.
Sadhguru: Namaskaram.
Sahil: Sadhguruji, my question is –
is enlightenment a gradual process
or it happens when our body, mind and energies comes to a point
where it is perfectly satisfied,
like making a quantum leap?
Thank you.
Sadhguru: Are you asking how it happens in UK or in India (Laughter)?
Sahil Gurung: (Laughs) On planet earth.
Sadhguru: (Laughs) So the question is –
is enlightenment a gradual process
or when your body, mind, energies align,
is it like a quantum leap?
Is it something that bursts out?
Sahil Gurung: Yes (Laughter).
Sadhguru: See, the mango season is just getting over.
You don’t know what it is,
Sahil, you are in UK.
Mango season is getting over.
In India, it’s a big thing.
If you looked at the mango tree in the month of October, November, December,
you didn’t see any sweetness dripping out of it.
Suddenly in January, February, flowers came.
They were not as attractive as jasmine or rose flowers or something.
Some tiny little flowers came.
Suppose you do not know this is a mango tree
and you tested it,
you take a leaf and bite it, it was quite bitter.
But suddenly in the month of April, May,
huge drops of sweetness (Laughs)
hanging there in the tree. Tch
Sahil, you have not eaten the mango this season (Laughs)?
Sahil Gurung: I got it from the supermarket, that’s all (Laughter).
Sadhguru: Eh! You are… You are eating mangoes from Nigeria (Laughter).
So, if you did not have prior
prior knowledge that this is a mango tree,
did you think
this tree is actually manufacturing this sweetness?
But you think suddenly in April, sweetness came?
It has been slowly manufacturing this sweetness
and it put it out at a certain season.
But it’s been on, right through the year, isn't it?
Mangoes happen only in one season.
You notice the sweetness only at a certain time.
This does not mean
the mango tree was not striving and working to produce that sweetness.
You cut any part of the mango tree and taste it –
tch, you will not find (Laughs) a slightest tinge of sweetness,
believe me.
But when the mango comes,
how much sweetness!
Where is it coming from?
It’s been working on it.
You couldn’t see it.
Similarly, is it a process?
For sure, it is a process.
But can everybody see the process,
identify the process?
No.
When somebody is evolving on the spiritual path,
others thought he is a nutcase.
Somebody thought he’s vagrant,
somebody thought he is a vagabond,
somebody thought he is something else.
But when the sweetness came,
everybody who tasted realized that
this is a fantastic thing (Applause).
So, nothing in the universe happens bang, bang, bang.
Everything is a process.
Can you identify the process,
can you recognize the process is the question.
Generally, anybody who carries
Generally among human beings,
when they are children,
any child which carries a certain level of genius within him,
which is irrepressible
Everybody has genius within them but they are repressible.
Systems in the society,
their own fears,
their own anxieties,
their own need for security represses their genius.
Every human being has some kind of genius
but over ninety percent of the human beings
never find expression to it because
they give in to other things.
Things become… Other things become more important.
When you were twelve, fifteen you thought,
“I’ll do this,
I’ll do that,
I’ll go to the moon.”
But you saw the neighborhood girl (Laughter)
and started calling her the moon (Laughter/Applause),
moon disappeared (Laughter).
Hey (Laughs)!
So, like this,
in everybody the possibility is wide open.
The thing is
can you sustain the process
and allow it to become that possibility.
Between possibility and reality, there is a distance.
Most people neither have the courage nor the conviction
to walk that distance.
Largely, spiritual process is a kind of an entertainment.
Go to discourse after discourse, discourse after discourse,
read more and more books
and debate how your atman, paramatman, your soul is floating here, there
and about heaven and hell and everything
but do nothing about this (Referring to oneself) (Audio disturbance).
So, it's largely (Laughter)
it’s largely like entertainment.
So, there is a process for sure.
The process can be approached consciously
or it may be an unconscious process
but you’re doing the right things.
This is the beauty of this universe –
whether you know or you do not know,
knowingly or unknowingly,
with discipline or with indiscipline,
with love or with hate,
if you do the right things,
right things will happen to you.
That is the beauty of this universe (Applause).
So Shankara, Adi Shankara said,
“Yogarathova bhogarathova.”
Somehow, either through yoga or bhoga,
somehow do it,
somehow find the truth of your inner nature
because what we are considering as truth is simply this –
whatever works on all levels of life must be the truth, isn't it?
Hmm?
Whatever really works on all levels of life must be the truth.
Whatever you know in your life, test it right now, because
you have a mind which can project.
Right now, you are striving for a certain level of income
or a certain kind of house
or a car
or something else or something else.
Put yourself in different stages of life and see
if it still means a lot to you.
See… Suppose
Not tomorrow,
let’s say hundred years later,
you are on your deathbed,
just see if your jewelry, your make up, your car will mean something to you on that day.
This does not mean you must give it up today.
It is just that you must keep it in its place,
you must not carry it in your heart (Laughs) (Applause).
There is a difference
between using something and being used by something.
Most people
Most people do not know how to use the things that they buy.
The things that they buy are using them up.
They are enslaving the human being.
Whatever things you want to use, you can use, that’s not an issue.
But the problem is
you let those things use you.
This is not okay.
So if you just take care that
you are not used by anything,
you understand the limited role that everything has in your life –
the limited role of your education,
the limited role of your career,
the limited role of your marriage,
the limited role of your relationships,
the limited role of your wealth,
the limited role of everything that you are doing –
if you understand
where one thing begins and where it ends,
then you don’t have to do anything,
spiritual process is on (Applause).
When the season is right,
the flowers will bloom and mangoes will come (Laughs) (Applause).
Arundhathi: The next question (Sadhguru laughs) comes from a prominent figure in Indian public life,
this is the Honorable Minister of State for Culture,
Tourism and Civil Aviation, Dr. Mahesh Sharma.
Dr. Mahesh Sharma: Thank you Sadhguruji.
You gave me opportunity to mark this celebration of Guru Poornima utsav
with this much big presence over here.
But a big question comes to my mind that we keep,
and especially the Indians keep after the God and parents,
guru at the highest esteem.
But we have not been able to make Guru Poornima celebration utsav in the same spirit of high spirit
as we respect the gurus.
Sadhguru: I kind of addressed this already in the beginning but anyway.
The reason why
Guru Poornima and so many other things,
which were of great spiritual importance in this country,
have slid back into the background of our lives is –
because we have been an occupied nation for a period of time
and whatever the framework that the occupying forces set for us,
when we got our independence,
we should have looked at
what kind of framework we want for our nation.
We did not do that.
We just allowed the same framework to continue.
For example,
in this country,
right from ancient times,
even for a farmer who ploughs the land,
even today many farmers
don’t set their plough on their land on Monday mornings.
Yes?
In Tamil Nadu, it’s still true.
In the north, it’s been given up
because no
no animals being used, all tractors.
You have to
You have taken a bank loan,
the interest is ticking,
so you want it to run all the seven days (Laughs),
all these things.
When the British came,
they changed these things
because they… they knew the strength of this nation was essentially in the culture.
So they wanted to break the culture.
Very systematically, they engineered
how to break the culture.
They made you Sunday holiday.
What are you going to do on Sunday?
Watch television and eat potato chips (Laughter)?
What are you going to do on Sunday?
They had an intention for a Sunday morning.
What is the intention for the majority of the population in this country on Sunday morning?
There is nothing for us to do on Sunday morning.
Monday morning, there’re lots of things happening,
but you have to go to office.
For a long time in this country,
the monthly holidays were like this -
pournami means
every pournami means three days holiday -
one day before, the day and the next day,
amavasya means two days holiday (Applause).
These
These two days of full moon day and new moon day
have something to do with our system (Referring to oneself),
something to do with the planet,
something to do with the very way we’re born.
We are physically here today
only because our mothers’ bodies were in sync with the cycles of the moon,
otherwise we won’t be here.
So, there are things which are happening in your system.
As you know, the very oceans are rising on these days.
When such a massive body of water is rising up,
this body (Referring to oneself)
which is over seventy percent water,
you think nothing is rising in this (Referring to oneself)?
That… The… Those days were kept as spiritually significant days,
those are not the days to go to work,
those are the days to focus upon yourself.
So, similarly the Guru Poornima used to be a huge festival across the
this whole region,
but it’s gone because people have to go to work.
So, I request you,
being
you being a minister in the Union Cabinet,
this is something that you must do (Applause),
that
I know for you to pitch for every pournima
pournami being a holiday is not going to be practical.
But at least Guru Poornima (Applause),
if you
From the federal government,
from the central government,
if you declare Guru Poornima as a holiday,
I will make sure Guru Poornima is celebrated across this country (Applause)
with great fervor (Applause)
because
because the spirit is still alive.
There is no space for expression.
There is no space or time for expression.
Please, if you can do this one thing,
and we can make Guru Poornima a big tourism attraction for this country (Laughter/Applause)
as
as I have already spoken to you
about making
India the spiritual gateway,
Guru Poornima can be the day
which really draws spiritual tourists from across the world to this country.
So, even as a part of your job (Laughter),
it’s a good thing to do (Laughs) (Applause).
Arundhathi: Sadhguru, the next question comes from Heena Parekh,
a twenty-year-old student from Northampton in the United Kingdom.
Heena Parekh: Sadhguru, what is the significance of initiation?
Sadhguru: Okay.
What is the significance of initiation?
Initiation is not about a bundle of instructions.
In fact, in any initiation process,
instructions are a kind of disturbance,
it’s a nuisance.
I am saying it’s a nuisance because
We are still giving instructions
because most people
because today they have all become educated,
everything has to be told, you know,
or it must be printed (Laughs) these days.
If you tell them also it’s not enough,
they wanted a printed sheet,
the instructions of the initiation
because they are all educated.
Their brains are full of words,
not of life.
Too many words,
so everything has to be verbal.
Even saying it is not good enough,
you have to print it
or you have to record it and give it to them
so that they can put headphones
and listen to the instructions every time.
Initiation is not a bundle of words.
If we have to use an analogy,
if you know something about electricity –
in electrical imple… you know, motors and stuff,
there is something called as induction.
The power is there,
the motor is there,
everything is there,
but without an induction switch it will not go.
All the ingredients are there
but still it will not happen
because there’s no induction of energy.
So initiation is like an induction.
You have all the ingredients to be meditative
but it doesn’t happen (Laughs).
Why does it not happen?
Because this is the way the creation itself happened.
If you go by the traditional explanation –
one way,
if you go by the modern scientific way –
it’s the same thing said in a different language.
Modern science is talking about
how everything was empty space.
Now they are removing the word empty and saying it was space.
There is no physicality there
but there seems to be something else there.
What that something else, we don’t know,
as per the science.
And today they’ve made experiments
where in vacuum state,
if you apply a certain energy around it –
not into it,
around it –
suddenly virtual protons and virtual neutrons will spill out.
That means creation begins
just because there’s energy playing around.
There is a beautiful story in the yogic tradition.
Shiva
You must understand the word Shiva.
Shiva means, shi-va means that which is not.
Appropriate description for space.
That which is, is physical creation.
That which is not,
is non-physical dimension of the existence.
So Shiva means that which is not.
Shiva was lying,
his body spread across the cosmos.
But he is not,
he doesn’t exist,
he doesn’t have a physical manifestation.
Then Shakti, a certain dimension of energy,
came and danced around him
and then he came alive.
Then he started spitting galaxies out of his mouth.
This is the most (Laughs) appropriate description
of how creation happened.
Still spitting galaxies,
new galaxies,
it’s continuously happening,
simply because a certain energy touched it.
Everything that was needed for creation was already there in him
but he needed induction.
So, initiation is a kind of an induction process.
But unfortunately today,
if I just ask people to just sit here,
we’ll do things for you,
they’ll ___ (Unclear-sit like this?) (Gestures) (Laughter)
“Nothing happening,
why is he not doing anything” (Laughs)?
You are supposed to say something.
So what to do?
For modern times, we say a lot of things,
we hang out with you (Laughter).
Today if you go and sit in the Dhyanalinga temple,
without instruction you can become meditative.
I can do that to you here now.
what's her name?
Heena.
Heena, you are in UK,
if you’re willing to just sit there,
I can do it to you now, wherever you are.
But right now, you got too
you are a student, still educating (Laughs).
Maybe you are a possibility, not fully educated (Laughter).
Too many words in your head,
the only thing you understand is words.
Because of that, instructions have come.
Otherwise, initiation is not about instruction.
There really no instruction in it.
Initiation is just an induction process,
it’s an energy process.
But we have to talk about energy, tch, you know.
We have to talk a lot about energy
before they open their mouth and (Gestures)
“Ohh, appadiya” (Laughter)?
Tough times for gurus (Laughter),
too much talking (Laughs).
If you don’t talk, nobody will be here.
Very few can really understand -
if we simply sit here and reverberate,
they will also sit here and reverberate.
Those numbers are small.
Well, in Isha, those numbers are increasing,
I don’t have to say much (Applause).
But in the larger world, you have to… tch,
you have to talk, talk, talk and talk,
hang out with people (Laughter) –
global gossip.
Arundhathi: Our next online participant is Manj Musik,
a well-known Punjabi hip-hop singer.
Sadhguru: Ohh!
Arundhathi: And he prefers to call his input an offering, rather than a question.
Sadhguru: Hope the audio works (Laughs).
Arundhathi: The next question comes from Sameer Oberoi,
an advertising professional in Gurgaon.
And his question, Sadhguru, is –
I hope to visit the ashram for Mahashivarathri next year
because I have been inspired by your description of Shiva
as the ultimate outlaw.
Can you tell us something more about this fascinating figure?’
Sadhguru: (Laughs) Shiva being the ultimate outlaw –
you must understand what is outlaw.
Many of you have suffered the in-laws (Laughter/Applause).
I hope you won’t meet too many outlaws.
But when we say the ultimate outlaw,
you must understand all laws –
all laws –
are of some meaning only in the physical sphere of life.
See suppose you did not have a body –
I want you to just imagine yourself,
you don’t have a body –
what law do you have to follow (Laughs)?
You can go wherever you want,
you can do whatever you want.
Yes?
Only because you have a body –
where to go,
where not to go,
what to do, what not to do?
Only in the physical realm, the laws have a meaning.
One who has transcended the physical,
he has no laws.
So he is a outlaw.
He is out of all laws.
This is what spiritual process means –
within yourself, you are out of all laws
because once you transcend your physical nature,
none of the laws bind you.
In the society – yes.
But within yourself –
no,
because you are an outlaw because
you are out of the physical nature.
So in that context,
he is the ultimate outlaw
and Mahashivarathri is his day.
The significance of the day is that on that day,
there is a phenomenal upsurge of energy within the human system.
This is why on that night,
you are not supposed to sleep,
you must keep your spine vertical
so that you make use of this natural upsurge within you.
So on that night, there is a huge festival here.
This year, this is going to be a mega festival because
we have crossed the twenty-one year cycle,
this is a new cycle (Applause)
and it is going to be a phenomenal event.
You must… You are in Gurgaon, not too far away,
you must be here on that day. It’s an incredible night
and we will have many things happening on that night.
We are… Already our teams are working to make this into a major possibility for every human being
and we will also make it happen across the country
and in many parts of the world in various cities,
having video feeds and stuff,
though there is a time difference in the other countries.
And as a precursor to this in a way
Not really a precursor but this is a special event which happens only once –
only once,
that is we don’t repeat this.
This will happen in December.
Till now, we have done three special events like this,
where they are production quality.
Entire ashram is done up for this purpose.
Not like other programs, which are repeated.
This is only onetime programs.
We did Vaibhav Shiva,
which was about how Shiva taught yoga.
Then we did three years later,
Leela –
this is about how Krishna taught yoga.
Then about three years ago,
we did Mahabharat,
which is the grandest story that you can imagine.
It’s a story inside a story inside a story.
It’s the most phenomenal story,
it’s the longest story on the planet.
So, an eight-day event happened like this,
hundreds of hours of videos.
They are still editing,
not released after three years (Laughs).
So this year,
in the month of December, between twenty-second and twenty-sixth,
we will have an event,
which is about the devotees of Shiva (Applause).
We have not
There are different types of cultures,
which have evolved out of devotion for Shiva.
They are in different geographical locations in the country, largely,
and they have their own practices,
they have their own traditions,
cultures,
their own flavor,
their own poetry,
their own music.
So, this will be a
an exquisite event of music, art, poetry
and of course the spiritual fundamental.
So this will be about the devotees of Shiva.
This will be a limited number of people,
we can’t have a crowd like this (Laughs),
but others can hang-out later (Laughter).
Okay?
We will make it available to you in some way.
So this will be a four… five day event in the month of December,
starting on the winter solstice,
which is twenty-second of December
twenty-first of December.
It’s an event to look forward to
because it’s an onetime event,
we will not repeat those events again.
Those of you who can afford to be there in terms of time and whatever else,
please make sure you are there.
I am excited (Laughter/Applause)
Arundhathi: And the last question of this evening’s sathsang
comes from Carmen Dragomir,
a journalist and writer from Romania.
Sadhguru: She’s not a gymnast (Referring to Romanian gymnast Carmen Ionescu) (Laughs)?
Carmen Dragomir: (Laughs) Namaskaram Sadhguru.
Sadhguru: Namaskaram.
Carmen Dragomir: On the occasion of the Guru Poornima,
what is the best gift a seeker can give to his guru?
Can we actually give anything to our guru
or unlike other relationship,
is just a take and take relationship for a student?
Sadhguru: On the occasion of Guru Poornima,
what is the best gift a seeker can give to his or her guru?
Can we actually give anything to our guru
or unlike other relationships,
it’s just a take and take relationship for a student (Laughs) (Applause)?
Now, if you really take and take,
I would be eternally grateful to you (Applause).
The problem is you take and throw,
take and throw,
take and throw (Laughter).
If you simply take, take and take,
what more does a guru want (Laughs)?
And about a gift that you can give me –
I appreciate the emotion behind it,
I truly appreciate the emotion behind it but
I want you to understand this much.
A gift means something that you can give away.
If you can give it away,
why would I need it (Laughter/Applause)?
If you can give it away, obviously I don’t need it.
But you can
In the name of guru,
you can give it away to a child who needs it,
you can… In the name of guru, you can give it away to some
some other project or process or something that’s happening.
That’s up to you.
Now, what one needs to understand is,
if you’re really serious about offering a gift to your guru,
what you are saying in a little
with a certain –
what to say –
with a certain disturbance within you,
is this just about take and take?
Please just take and take,
not take and throw, okay?
If you take, take, take and take,
that's the greatest thing you can do for me (Laughs) (Applause).
Carmen Dragomir: Thank you.
Now, on this Guru Poornima,
in some way –
if you want to really make a gift –
in some way you offer something that is you,
not some material that you can get rid of.
Give away the nastiest part of you today, to me. Okay?
I am not asking for the beautiful things that are there in you.
I am not even asking for your love.
I am asking,
whatever is the nastiest part of you –
your prejudice,
your hatred,
your anger –
give it away to me today, let me see (Applause).
Because I want you to know,
if you give away your anger to me,
I know how – anger is tremendous energy you know, tch –
I know how to transform anger into something very fantastic (Laughs) (Applause).
So, if not the whole of you,
at least one nasty part of you,
please give it away today, let me see. Hmm?
Can you?
Participants: Yes.
Carmen Dragomir: Yes.
Sadhguru: The beautiful things you can keep for yourself.
The nastiest part of you, please give it away to me, let me see.
Don’t give me your mother-in-law (Laughter) –
“Sadhguru, please take” (Laughter).
Something that’s a part of you.
If you think you want to give something,
because I am telling you,
because many questions were asked in this direction.
The greatest thing or the most important thing that needs to happen on this planet is
an inward movement within human beings.
This hugely empowered humanity,
without the necessary inner balance, is a potential danger to everybody,
to everything.
To every other life,
to every other creature, we are a danger.
So, more and more people should commit themselves
to turn the world inward.
If you are already deeply entangled in life,
at least send your children in that direction.
Something that is very precious to you,
that’s what you must give, isn't it,
if you want to give?
Send your children in that direction,
that they will strive to turn the world inward
because this is the most important thing that needs to happen
if human beings and every other creature on this planet
has to live reasonably well on this planet,
otherwise there is no other way.
So, if you want to give something nasty,
please give it away, I am welcome
you are most welcome.
If you want to give something beautiful,
you must give yourself, your time, your life.
If that’s not possible,
anyway the future generation,
at least turn them in that direction.
It’s very important.
This is for the well-being of their future.
It’s very, very important
that big number of people turn inward
and they have a sense of balance.
If this doesn’t happen,
you will see a very bad human society,
which will rub and clash.
The friction that happens is too much.
So, on this day,
on this very auspicious day,
my best wishes and blessings for you
to live as glorious human beings.
Thank you very much for hanging out with us (Applause).
(Sadhguru): Somebody who has so many questions should never talk about bhakthi
because bhakthas have no questions.
That’s why I am telling you for you people
I am keeping the bhakthi out
because you are incapable of devotion.
If we talk devotion
you will end up deception.
So, better just slice everything and look what is inside
because your mind is made like this,
if I give you this and say you should never open this,
you should never open this,
just keep this with you,
this will take you to heaven.
In your sleep you will walk
sleep walk and go and open it.
Isn't it so?
So, that’s the kind of mind you have,
so don’t talk bhakthi now.
We’ll see…when those things change we’ll talk bhakthi
because I am not here to propound philosophies for you.
I am here just to give you a method that works for you,
not for somebody else.
There was some great bhaktha somewhere,
he was dripping with ecstasy,
it doesn’t matter, that’s not for you.
I am not saying you will never be capable of that
but right now with a thinking mind,
a mind which likes logic more than anything else,
with this mind don’t talk bhakthi,
you will just deceive yourself.
When such a thing comes that
your mind and what your mind says is no more significant to you
then bhakthi will naturally come,
you don’t have to do anything about it
but right now what your mind says is very important for you, isn't it?
Yes or no?
When what your mind says is important for you do not talk bhakthi,
it will be a waste of time and life.
Sadhguru: The word sanyas or brahmacharya means
to be on the path of the divine.
When is the right age?
I think that should be the first thing that you do in your life.
When is the right age to get married
that is subject to social situations
and above all
these thoughts come to you because
till you were 10, 11, 12, 13 also maybe you were okay,
tch, after that
suddenly this chemical cocktail of hormones got into your system;
now you looked,
suddenly everybody looks different. (Laughter)
Once it so happened,
Shankaran Pillai went to a party
and when he came out of the party
he told his wife,
“You know, alcohol makes you look so beautiful.” (Laughter)
The wife said,
“Well, I didn’t have a drop.” (Laughter)
“No not you, me.” (Laughter)
So a little bit of hormone entered your system
and suddenly everything started looking different.
After this hormone leaves your system
then you look back at your life and see
“Did I do all these things?” (Laughter)
Before they came also it looked like that,
after it’s gone also it looked like that.
That in-between period
when you are being spiked from inside (Laughs)
suddenly everything looks different.
Very few human beings are capable
of keeping this spiking aside and look at life the way it is
and then enjoy the spiking only to the extent it's needed.
All others are driven by it,
they shape their lives around it.
So, sanyas means just this,
that you are not shaping your life
around a temporary influence of chemicals on your system.
It's a little bit of inebriation, you know,
suddenly everything looks different.
“So when should I go beyond these things?”
Sanyas is not a process of suppression or denial;
it's a process of transcendence.
When should you transcend?
As quickly as possible.
Yes?
When should you suppress?
Never,
because suppression is not a solution;
transcendence is a solution.
Transcendence is not only a solution,
it is way beyond that.
It is beyond the problem.
So, whenever we are trapped in our limitations
somewhere we start thinking
this limitation is the only reality.
This limitation is not the only reality.
You remember a time when there was no sexuality
and there was no talk about going beyond
as a child.
Isn't it so?
Yes?
So, this is an in-between phase.
Nature
don’t believe all the funny things that happen within you
and all the romantic thoughts that go in your head,
nature just wants to reproduce.
If it doesn’t drive you,
you wouldn’t do it.
All the pain involved in delivering a child
but still we are over-populated.
Hmm?
That wouldn’t happen
if there wasn’t enough drive from inside.
Tch… You are spiked from inside,
sabotaged from inside.
Once your hormones hijacked your intelligence
after that wherever you look you see only that.
It takes a certain level of awareness and capability
to look beyond that.
This is not a denial
but being able to see beyond that.
Once you see beyond that
you understand the limitations of what this is.
What is limited should be handled in limited way.
You don’t have to invest your whole life on it, isn't it?
Yes?
A small aspect of your life
should only get that much attention.
If that spreads through your consciousness
then that’ll become a crippling life.
So, sanyas is a realization of this
and when you have the ability to transcend,
yes.
So, now you also want to know what happens after death.
I think some things you know best only by experience. (Laughter)
Just like marriage; (Laughter)
you know it only best by experience.
Somebody else tells you a million things;
it's not true, isn't it?
It’s your experience.
So, this has always been the vein;
this has always been the line
that people have been taking.
If
anybody appears in front of you
who happens to be a Guru or claims to be one,
immediately the first thing you ask is
“What is life?
What is death?”
See what you are asking is,
I want you to understand,
decipher your question down a little more and see
what is it that you are asking?
You are asking, “What is the nature of my life?”
Isn't it so?
When you ask what is death – “Where will I go?”
You want to know what is the nature of this;)
what will happen beyond this body?
So you are asking “Who am I?”
I am asking,
why are you asking me?
See if you go on the street
and ask somebody
“Who are you” –
all right.
If you go on the street and ask somebody
“Who am I,”
you get instantly arrested. (Laughter)
This happened in the Cincinnati airport;
people were standing in a queue to check in
at the check-in counter.
One man comes, jumps the whole line
and just goes straight to the lady behind the counter
and
She says, “Sir, please go stand in the line.
Everybody is in the line.”
He said, “No, no, no, I am in a hurry.
Please check me in.”
She said, “Everybody is in a hurry.
Please stand in the line.”
Then he raised his voice and said,
“Do you know who I am?”
The lady promptly picked up the microphone and she said,
“There is a man here who doesn’t know who he is.
Can somebody help him?
Can somebody help him?”
You are alive right now.
If you want to know what this is,
this is where you should look,
not somewhere else.
So,
unfortunately you are with me.
If you were with the right kind of spiritual people
they would have immediately told you,
“You are atman,
you are… you are ever for … you know,
all pervading, you are forever,
you are this,
you are God’s embodiment.”
You want to hear this bull from me? (Laughter)
They would have told you all these things.
Now, don’t think I am confusing you
because I don’t have to make such effort,
you are already confused. (Laughter)
Do I have to make any effort in that direction?
I don’t have to make any direction (effort?);
you are thoroughly confused, isn't it?
But confusion is a better state
than stupid conclusions.
Yes?
Confusion is a little better state
than idiotic conclusions that you have made.
Conclusion means death;
confusion means still a possibility.
Yes or no?
Confusion means still a possibility,
you are still looking.
Conclusion is death,
you are finished.
You are a written off case.
‘I am atman’ - you are finished. (Laughter)
So what happens, death
we’ll find out in some time. (Laughter)
Right now
what's happening now?
If you eat a banana,
banana becomes a human being;
something phenomenal is happening now, isn't it?
Let’s find out what's happening now.
There is something inside here
which can make a piece of bread into a human being.
Tch
We must find out what's happening now.
If you understand,
if you experience what's happening now
beyond the physicality of who you are,
even after the body is done
still you know what's happening.
If you are unable to know it now
how will you know what's after death?
So, if you are looking for spirituality for solace
or for entertainment
you just came to the wrong place.
I am not an entertainer, (Laughs)
nor am I a solace peddler.
If you are seeking a solution
then we can beat out a path for you to walk,
not an answer.
You understand?
I have no answers for any damn questions you ask.
If the question is true,
if the question is genuine,
if the pain of ignorance is tearing you apart,
if the pain of not knowing is truly bothering you
then I can give you a method,
I can give you a way
to find a solution
but I have no answers
because all answers are just stories
which will either solace you
or entertain you.
